GOOD
EVENING EVERYONE AND WELCOME TO
THE FEBRUARY 12 WORK SESSION
OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL
WHERE WE HAVE THE PLEASURE
OF LEARNING ABOUT A NEW
APPROACH TO ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT FROM MR. FOURNIER.
MR. TONY, MR. TONY, YOU HAVE
THE CON GOOD EVENING.
>> WHERE GOOD EVENING MEMBERS
OF COUNCIL.
THANK YOU FOR GIVING THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO COME BACK AND
SPEAK WITH YOU ABOUT MY ROLE
TONIGHT JUST TO GIVE YOU THE
LINEUP OF COMING ATTRACTIONS SO
MARCH 11TH WILL BE THE BUDGET
WORK SESSION.
SO YOU'LL BE HEARING FROM SOME
OF THE STAFF REGARDING THE
BUDGET APRIL 15 AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE COUNCIL
MEETING IS WHEN I WILL BE
PRESENTING NEXT YEAR'S BUDGET
TO YOU IN MAY.
WE WILL SKIP BECAUSE WE DEVOTE
ALL OF OUR ATTENTION DURING TO
THE PASSAGE OF THE BUDGET
NUMBER OF SESSIONS RELATED TO
THAT AND THEN IN JUNE WE'LL
COME BACK FOR WORK SESSION
FOCUSING ON THE TRUNK LINE
STUDY THAT YOU ASK US TO DO
SOME MONTHS AGO.
THE STUDY HAS BEEN COMPLETED
MAY HEAR SOMETHING ABOUT IT
BECAUSE IT'S GOING TO BE
DISCUSSED WITHIN THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
BEFORE IT COMES HERE.
>> MR. DOWNEY, WHAT MA'AM,
COULD YOU PLEASE KEEP YOUR SIGN
OUT OF THE WALKWAY?
THANK YOU, MR. TONY.
SELL THE CASE.
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WILL
DISCUSS IT FIRST.
IT'LL PROBABLY GET INTO THE
PUBLIC REALM BEFORE IT COMES
HERE.
STAFF WILL COME AND WALK YOU
THROUGH WHAT WE HAVE DONE, WHAT
THE OPTIONS MIGHT BE AND WHAT
SOME OF THE STEPS FOR
CONSIDERATION WILL BE.
WE WON'T GO PAST YOU WILL
FIGURE THAT OUT.
>> WE GET A LITTLE FURTHER ON
SUMMER BREAKS, ET CETERA.
BUT THAT'S WHAT THE COMING
ATTRACTIONS ARE LIKE AND MR.
FOURNIER WILL COME UP AND WALK
THROUGH THIS PRESENTATION.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING MEMBERS
OF COUNCIL.
I'M GLAD TO BE JOINING YOU ONCE
AGAIN TO TALK ABOUT A NEW
APPROACH TO ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT IN THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR.
LET ME JUST START WITH A COUPLE
OF HOUSEKEEPING NOTES WHICH IS
THAT I KNOW WE HAVE MET ABOUT
THIS BEFORE WE MET TO SPEAK
ABOUT THIS AT THE DECEMBER CITY
COUNCIL PLANNING SESSION.
I'VE HAD AN OPPORTUNITY TO
SPEAK WITH INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS
OF COUNCIL.
SO WHAT I'M GOING TO DO IS
SINCE THIS IS THE FIRST
TELEVISED MEETING WHERE WE'RE
DISCUSSING THIS REPORT, I'M
GOING TO GIVE WHAT I'LL CALL A
READER'S DIGEST VERSION OF SOME
OF THE MAIN TENETS OF THE
REPORT SOME MOST OF WHICH
YOU'VE ALREADY HEARD BUT
PROBABLY BEARS SOME REPEATING
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PUBLIC
AND THEN TALK ABOUT KEY
RECOMMENDATIONS AND A COUPLE
OF MERGING ISSUES AND THEN
WE'LL OPEN UP FOR DISCUSSION IF
THERE'S ANY DISCUSSION POINTS
OR QUESTIONS FROM THE COUNCIL.
SO WHERE ARE WE JUST AS A
REFRESHER, THIS REPORT WAS
DIRECTED BY THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION IN 2002
A RESOLUTION SPONSORED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER EYER AND ASKED
US TO EXAMINE OUR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES TO SEE
WHERE THEY CAN BE IMPROVED.
THIS COINCIDED WITH WORK THAT
WAS REALLY ALREADY UNDERWAY ON
THE STAFF SIDE TO IMPLEMENT OUR
GOVT OUR TIMELINE PERMITTING
SOFTWARE THAT WE'VE BEEN
IMPLEMENTING ALL ACROSS THE
ORGANIZATION BUT HAVE BEEN
WORKING RECENTLY AND
IMPLEMENTING FOR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT PERMITS IN THAT
PROCESS REALLY FOR STAFF TO
CONFRONT A LOT OF ISSUES ABOUT
OUR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
AND WHETHER WE COULD BE DOING
BETTER.
SO WITH THESE EFFORTS COME FIND
WE ENGAGED A FAIRLY
COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF OUR
LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES
INCLUDING THREE EXTERNAL
REPORTS ONE PREPARED BY ANN
ARBOR SPARK THAT TO LOOK AT
BEST PRACTICES FROM PEER
COMMUNITIES ONE PREPARED BY
CARLYLE WARTMAN THAT'S A KIND
OF A DEEPER DOVE ON ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT POWERS AND
OPPORTUNITIES THAT EXIST FOR
MUNICIPALITIES IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
AND THEN A THIRD REPORT THAT
WAS PREPARED BY OUR PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT UNIT WHOSE PURPOSE
WAS TO ENGAGE WITH STAKEHOLDERS
WHO DO BUSINESS WITH THE CITY
AND HEAR FROM THEM WHAT THEIR
CONCERNS ARE AND WHAT THEIR
RECOMMENDATIONS ARE AND ALL
OF THAT FED INTO THE MAIN
REPORT DRAFTED BY THE
ADMINISTRATORS OFFICE WHICH IS
A SYNTHESIS OF RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR HOW THE CITY CAN IMPROVE
OUR LAND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS.
SO AS I SAID, COUNCIL WAS
BRIEFED DECEMBER 11TH TWENTY
TWENTY THREE FINAL REPORT WAS
RELEASED DECEMBER 18TH.
I'VE HAD THANK YOU ALL FOR
SETTING SOME TIME ASIDE AND AND
MEETING WITH ME AND TALKING TO
ME ABOUT THE REPORT AND
I THINK
OUR PLAN IS TO WORKING WITH
COUNCIL MEMBER IA AND OTHER
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL BRING
FORWARD A SMALL NUMBER
OF RESOLUTIONS IN MARCH THAT
WILL BE A REACTION TO REPORT
AND HOPEFULLY PROVIDE FEEDBACK
BACK TO STAFF ON HOW WE CAN
MOVE FORWARD WITH THIS WORK.
SO I HAVE BEEN TOLD THAT THE
REPORT IS A LITTLE LENGTHY AND
I WAS RACKING MY BRAIN ON HOW I
CAN QUANTIFY WHAT IT SAYS IN
SIMPLE OF TERMS POSSIBLE AND
THE SIMPLEST WAY TO QUANTIFY
THE REPORT IS LEGALIZE HOUSING
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE HEAR THIS
TERM.
WHAT THEY THINK ABOUT IS ZONING
AND THAT'S A REALLY, REALLY
IMPORTANT PART OF THE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT DISCUSSION.
BUT IT'S SO MUCH MORE THAN JUST
ZONING, RIGHT?
IF YOU HAVE A REALLY FORWARD
THINKING ZONING CODE BUT THE
PROCESS THAT YOUR ORGANIZATION
UNDERGOES TO APPROVE LAND
DEVELOPMENT IS ARCANE AND
LENGTHY AND EXPENSIVE AND
DIFFICULT TO NAVIGATE THAT
ZONING CODE IS NEVER GOING TO
BE REALIZED.
>> AND SO WHEN WE THINK ABOUT
LEGALIZING HOUSING, I ALSO WANT
TO THINK ABOUT THAT REGULATORY
SIDE AND THE PROCESS SIDE AND
THAT'S REALLY WHAT WE TRY TO
FOCUS ON IN THE REPORT.
AND I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE
FOUR MAIN VALUES THAT WE ARE
RECOMMENDING THAT THE CITY SET
AS ITS STRATEGIC PRIORITY FOR
LAND DEVELOPMENT STUDIES NEVER
REALLY HAD A VERY STRONG ETHOS
WHEN IT COMES TO LAND
DEVELOPMENT.
THERE HASN'T BEEN CLEAR
DIRECTION FROM THE COUNCIL THAT
LAST OVER TIME AND HOW THE
STAFF SHOULD BE PRIORITIZING
PROJECTS AND HOW WE SHOULD BE
STRUCTURING STRUCTURING OUR
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES
AND PRACTICES.
AND SO OUR RECOMMENDATION ARE
MOST IMPORTANT RECOMMENDATION
IS TO PROVIDE THAT VALUE IN
THAT STRATEGIC ORIENTATION AND
THE FIRST THING THAT WE WANT TO
TALK ABOUT IS SUPPORT FOR
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AT ALL
INCOME LEVELS AND THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT CAVEAT HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AT ALL INCOME
LEVELS.
SIX YEARS AGO THE MICHIGAN
STATE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY DID A NEEDS
ASSESSMENT IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN TO DETERMINE HOW
COMMUNITIES WERE MEETING THE
DEMAND FOR HOUSING AND THE
RESULTS ACROSS THE STATE WERE
SOMEWHAT HARROWING.
BUT IN ANN ARBOR IN PARTICULAR,
WHAT MR. FOUND WAS THAT WE HAVE
A DEFICIT OF HOUSING AT NEARLY
ALL INCOME LEVELS THAT NEARLY
ALL INCOME LEVELS OVER THE LAST
SIX YEARS THAT SITUATION HAS
NOT GOTTEN BETTER.
HOUSING PRICES ARE AT AN ALL
TIME HIGH HAVING QUADRUPLED FOR
TOWNHOMES AND CONDOS SINCE TWO
THOUSAND ELEVEN AND NEARLY
TRIPLED FOR SINGLE FAMILY HOMES
.
THE NUMBER OF UNITS LISTED FOR
SALE EVERY MONTH CONTINUES TO
TREND DOWN TO HISTORIC LOWS AND
THE AFFORDABILITY HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY INDEX IS AT AN
ALL TIME LOW AND THAT IS THE
NUMBER OF HOMES AFFORDABLE TO
MEDIUM INCOME BUYERS.
IT IS AT AN ALL TIME LOW.
SO WHAT DO WE DO ABOUT IT?
ECONOMISTS AND SOCIAL
SCIENTISTS HAVE BEEN STUDYING
THIS QUESTION AND THERE ARE
SOME PRETTY CLEAR ANSWERS.
IN TWENTY NINETEEN THE LEWIS
CENTER FOR REGIONAL POLICY
STUDIES AT UCLA RELEASED A
REPORT THAT PROVIDED A
LITERATURE REVIEW OF ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL SCIENCE STUDIES
OF THIS PROBLEM.
IT'S CALLED THE EFFECT
OF MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENT ON
NEIGHBORHOOD RENTS.
WHAT A LITERATURE REVIEW IS FOR
THOSE OF YOU WHO DON'T KNOW AS
IT IS LITERALLY A REVIEW OF ALL
OF THE RECENT LITERATURE ON A
TOPIC AND THE POINT OF IT IS TO
SUMMARIZE WHAT IS THE SCIENCE
SAY?
WHAT ARE THE FINDINGS SHOWING
US AND WHAT THE FINDINGS SHOWED
US IN THIS REVIEW IS PRICES FOR
HOUSING AS IT TURNS OUT ARE A
CLASSIC SUPPLY AND DEMAND
PROBLEM, A CLASSIC SUPPLY
DEMAND PROBLEM AMONG THEIR
MAJOR FINDINGS THEY FOUND THAT
NEW MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENT
DOES NOT COME AT THE EXPENSE
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
IT ACTUALLY HELPS TO PROMOTE IT
WITH MORE HOUSING UNITS ACROSS
THE INCOME SPECTRUM, PRICES
STABILIZE AND MORE PEOPLE ARE
ABLE TO AFFORD HOUSING WITHOUT
SUBSIDY.
IN ADDITION, BECAUSE PRICES
STABILIZE THE DOLLARS THAT
GOVERNMENTS HAVE TO SUBSIDIZE
HOUSING GO FURTHER.
PERHAPS THE MOST INTERESTING
PART OF THIS RESEARCH IS THE
DETAILED DISCUSSION ON
MIGRATION CHAINS AND HOW THEIR
AFFECTED BY NEW HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AS NEW HOUSING
COMES ON LINE AT MARKET RATE OR
EVEN AT ABOVE MARKET RATE
PRICES CAUSES CASCADING
VACANCIES DOWN THE ECONOMICS
SCALE AS HOME BUYERS VACATE
EXISTING HOMES AND EXISTING
PROPERTIES AND MOVE INTO
MARGINALLY MORE EXPENSIVE
PROPERTIES.
>> THIS CASCADING VACANCY
CAUSES COMPETITION FOR HOUSING
AND IT CAUSES PRICES TO
STABILIZE RESEARCHERS AT THE
UPJOHN INSTITUTE SHOWED THAT IN
COMMUNITIES WITH ROBUST HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT, THE ADDITION
OF ONE HUNDRED NEW MARKET RATE
UNITS CAUSES 70 BELOW MARKET
RATE HOUSING UNITS TO BECOME
AVAILABLE IN 40 UNITS TO BECOME
AVAILABLE IN A COMMUNITIES
LOWEST INCOME NEIGHBORHOODS.
THE EFFECTS OF THESE MIGRATION
CHAINS ARE MORE ROBUST WHEN
THERE IS A GREATER SUPPLY
OF HOUSING ACROSS THE INCOME
SPECTRUM.
SO COMMUNITIES THAT ARE
DEVELOPING PROPERTY TO SERVE
ALL INCOME LEVELS CREATE
STRONGER AND MORE IMPACTFUL
MIGRATION CHAINS, THEREBY
HAVING A GREATER EFFECT ON
STABILIZING HOUSING PRICES
OVERALL.
SO WHAT DOES THIS MEAN FOR ANN
ARBOR, THE CITY'S HOUSING
POLICY RECENTLY UP TO THIS
POINT HAS BEEN FOCUSED ON
INVESTING DOLLARS IN
SUBSIDIZING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DIRECTLY.
THAT'S A GOOD STRATEGY.
ALL INCOME LEVELS ALSO MEANS
SUBSIDIZING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AS MUCH AS IS FEASIBLE.
>> BUT IF THAT'S ALL WE DO, WE
AREN'T GOING TO MAKE THE
PROGRESS WE NEED TO MAKE ON
STABILIZING HOUSING PRICES.
AND SO THAT'S WHY THE NUMBER
ONE VALUE THAT WE'RE
RECOMMENDING TO BE ESPOUSED
THROUGH THE CITY COUNCIL IS
SUPPORT FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
AT ALL INCOME LEVELS SO WE CAN
SOLVE THE AFFORDABILITY PROBLEM
WITH A COMPREHENSIVE SOLUTION.
>> THAT'S WHAT I TALK ABOUT
ENGAGING IN PLACEMAKING
INITIATIVES TO PLACEMAKING IS
THE INTENTIONAL INVESTMENT
OF RESOURCES TO CREATE QUALITY
BUILDINGS AND SPACES, PUBLIC
AMENITIES, STREETSCAPES AND
OTHER PLACES THAT ARE DESIRABLE
AND ATTRACTIVE TO PEOPLE.
WE RECOMMEND THAT THE CITY
SHOULD BE PROACTIVE ABOUT
SHAPING IMPORTANT CORRIDORS TO
CREATE DESTINATION SPACES THAT
ATTRACT INVESTMENT AND TAKING
THIS EFFORT SERIOUSLY WILL
REQUIRE AN AMENDMENT TO THE
CHARTER WHICH WE'LL TALK ABOUT
LATER TO ALLOW THE CITY TO
TRANSACT PROPERTY MORE EASILY.
BUT TO PUT IT ANOTHER WAY,
ENGAGING IN PLACEMAKING IS THE
CITY ACTIVELY ENGAGING IN THE
CREATION OF WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS
DISTRICTS.
THE TAXI ONE REZONING EFFORT
THAT CITY COUNCIL AND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION HAVE BEEN
UNDERTAKING IS A REALLY
IMPORTANT EFFORT IN PLACEMAKING
WE ARE CHANGING ZONING ALONG
THESE TRANSPORTATION CORRIDORS
TO MAKE THE MORE DENSE AND TO
MAKE THEM WALKABLE AND TO MAKE
THEM MORE DYNAMIC AND COMPLEX
NEIGHBORHOOD ENVIRONMENTS.
BUT ZONING ALONE MAY NOT BE
ENOUGH TO JUMPSTART DEVELOPMENT
IN SOME OF THESE DISTRICTS THE
CITY MAY BE INTERESTED IN
PURSUING PURCHASE OPTIONS OR
INTERESTS IN REAL PROPERTY OR
BUYING PROPERTY OUTRIGHT
PROPERTIES THAT HAVE BEEN
HISTORICALLY DIFFICULT TO
REDEVELOP FOR VARIOUS REASONS
WE MAY BE ABLE TO HELP BRING
THEM TO MARKET AND JUMPSTART
DEVELOPMENT IN THESE TWO ONE
CORRIDORS AND IT'S SOMETHING
THAT THE CITY SHOULD SERIOUSLY
CONSIDER IN THE REPORT I WRITE
ABOUT THE LOWERTOWN
NEIGHBORHOOD A GREAT
NEIGHBORHOOD IN THE CITY DON'T
GET ME WRONG WITH LEGACY
BUSINESSES WITH NEW BUSINESSES
THAT ARE DOING WELL BUT IT IS A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT HAS SUFFERED
OVER TIME BECAUSE OF POOR
PLACEMAKING YOU KNOW A LOT
OF THAT NEIGHBORHOOD IS
DEDICATED TO UNIVERSITY USES TO
UNIVERSITY OWNED PARKING LOTS
AND GARAGES IN PARTICULAR WHERE
THERE ONCE WAS HOUSING AND THAT
IS NOT THE KIND OF USE THAT
MAKES A NEIGHBORHOOD ACTIVE AND
VITAL AND MAKES IT PERPETUATE
OVER TIME MAKES IT ECONOMICALLY
AND SOCIALLY SUSTAINABLE PLACE
.
THERE ARE ALSO I SPENT SOME
TIME TALKING ABOUT THE BUILDING
THAT'S IN LOWERTOWN, A BUILDING
THAT IS VERY UNIQUELY SITUATED
ONE OF THE ONLY PARCELS I THINK
IN THE CITY THAT OVERLOOKS THE
RIVER WHERE YOU COULD HAVE A
QUALITY RETAIL OR RESTAURANT
EXPERIENCE BUT BECAUSE OF PRIOR
OWNERSHIP DECISIONS IT IS OWNED
BY DTT.
THEY INTEND TO OWN IT IN
PERPETUITY AND NOW THE BUILDING
WILL THAT VACANT FOR SOME TIME
THAT COULD BE A PLACEMAKING
OPPORTUNITY IN THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD TO DEVELOP A
PROPERTY AND BRING IT TO MARKET
IN A WAY THAT WILL STABILIZE
THE INTEGRITY OF THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
.
IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT FOR US TO
CONSIDER PROTECTING AND
EXPANDING THE TAX BASE.
WE NEED TO BE MUCH MORE
STRATEGIC AND PROACTIVE ABOUT
SHAPING LAND USE IS IN ANN
ARBOR IN WAYS THAT BETTER
ACHIEVE OUR PUBLIC POLICY GOALS
AND THE GOALS LAID OUT IN OUR
LAND USE PLANS IN THE REPORT I
TALK A LOT ABOUT THE EDWARDS
BROTHERS MOLOI PROPERTY WHICH
IS ABOUT A SEVENTEEN ACRE
PARCEL DOWN ON SOUTH STATE
STREET THAT MORE THAN A DECADE
AGO THE CITY HAD A PURCHASE
OPTION TO BUY A PROPERTY AND
HOPEFULLY CONVERT IT INTO
HOUSING.
BUT AS THE EDWARDS BROTHERS MY
FACTORY WAS BEING SHUT DOWN.
THE UNIVERSITY BECAME
INTERESTED IN THE PROPERTY AND
GAVE A VERY AGGRESSIVE OFFER TO
DEVELOP THE PROPERTY.
IT'S AN INTERESTING STORY AND
I'D ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO READ
ALL THE DETAILS ON.
BUT THE UPSHOT IS IS RIGHT NOW
THIS PROPERTY DOESN'T HAVE ANY
HOUSING.
>> IT HAS ATHLETIC FIELDS IN A
PARKING LOT AND IT'S COMPLETELY
TAX EXEMPT EVEN THOUGH OUR
SOUTH STATE STATE EXCUSE ME
SOUTH STATE STREET CORRIDOR
PLAN CALLED FOR THAT PARCEL TO
BE DEVELOPED INTO HOUSING.
THESE ARE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE
CITY TO PROTECT ITS TAX BASE
FROM TAX EXEMPTION TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE ARE GENERATING REVENUE
TO KEEP THE GOVERNMENT HEALTHY
BUT MORE IMPORTANTLY TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE LAND USES ARE
PRODUCTIVE AND THE LAND USES
ARE MEETING WITH OUR LONG TERM
VISION AND OUR LONG TERM PLANS.
SO I WANT TO SAY WE BENEFIT
GREATLY FROM YOUR PRESENCE IN
THE COMMUNITY.
MANY ANN ARBOR RIGHTS
ARE PROUD
RIGHTLY THAT WE ARE HOME TO ONE
OF THE I THINK THE NUMBER ONE
PUBLIC RESEARCH UNIVERSITY ON
THE PLANET AND OF COURSE THE
NATIONAL CHAMPION UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN FOOTBALL TEAM AND
THAT TAKES A LOT FOR ME TO SAY
THAT AS A SPARTAN BUT BUT WE
SHOULD BE PROUD OF RIGHT U OF M
IS ABSOLUTELY A STABILIZING
FORCE IN THIS COMMUNITY DURING
ROUGH ECONOMIC TIMES THE
EMPLOYMENT AND THE ACTIVITY
THAT THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
GENERATES HELPS TO KEEP THIS
CITY AFLOAT IN MORE THAN ONE
WAY.
BUT THE BENEFITS RUN BOTH WAYS
TO ONE OF THE REASONS WHY THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN IS SUCH
A DESIRABLE DESTINATION FOR
PEOPLE TO WORK AND FOR PEOPLE
TO ASSOCIATE IS BECAUSE OF THE
QUALITY OF THE COMMUNITY THAT
ANN ARBOR IS RIGHT.
PEOPLE WANT TO BE HERE.
PEOPLE ARE EXCITED TO LIVE HERE
TO BUY HOMES HERE AND WORK HERE
FOR A TIME.
THEY'RE EXCITED TO GO TO
COLLEGE HERE AND SO WE NEED TO
FIND WAYS TO MAKE SURE THAT THE
RELATIONSHIP WE HAVE WITH THE
UNIVERSITY IS ALSO MUTUALLY
BENEFICIAL.
WE SHOULDN'T AS A REACTIONARY
STRATEGY TRY TO PREVENT
UNIVERSITIES EXPANSION BECAUSE
OF THEIR SUCCESS AND THEIR
HEALTH IS OUR SUCCESS OUR
HEALTH TOO.
BUT THE MORE WE ARE ABLE TO
ACCUMULATE INTERESTS IN
PROPERTY, THE MORE STRATEGIC
INTERESTS AND PARCELS WE CAN
OWN, THE MORE OPPORTUNITIES WE
WILL HAVE TO WORK OUT MUTUALLY
BENEFICIAL ARRANGEMENTS WITH
THE UNIVERSITY TO DETERMINE HOW
THESE LAND USES SHOULD WORK IN
OUR CITY AND MAKE SURE THAT WE
ARE PROPPING UP OUR TAXABLE
VALUES AND DEVELOPING OUR
PARCELS IN A WAY THAT'S
PRODUCTIVE TO THE INTEGRITY
OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE
LAST CERTAINLY NOT LEAST IS
PURSUING SUSTAINABILITY IN THE
CITY'S EIGHT TO ZERO PLAN CALLS
FOR THE CITY TO SIGNIFICANTLY
IMPROVE THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY
OF OUR HOMES, OUR BUSINESSES,
OUR SCHOOLS, OUR PLACES
OF WORSHIP OR RECREATIONAL
SITES, OUR GOVERNMENT
FACILITIES.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE THIS
WILL ONLY HAPPEN WITH NEW
INVESTMENTS IN PROPERTY AND NEW
DEVELOPMENT UNLESS EXISTING
BUILDINGS ARE INVESTED IN OR
UNLESS THEY'RE REPLACED WITH
NEW BUILDINGS THEY WILL
CONTINUE TO BE UNSUSTAINABLE
FROM AN ENERGY PERSPECTIVE.
SO WE NEED TO FIND WAYS TO
IMPROVE THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY
OF OUR BUILDINGS.
MAYBE NOT EVERY BUILDING CAN BE
CARBON NEUTRAL BUT EVERY
BUILDING CAN BE IMPROVED IN AN
IMPORTANT WAY TO MAKE IMPORTANT
SUSTAINABILITY GAINS IN THE
COMMUNITY AND WE SHOULD BE
TRYING TO DO THAT STATING THAT
SUSTAINABILITY IS ONE OF OUR
FOUR PRIORITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT
WILL CAUSE DEVELOPMENTS TO BE
MORE SUSTAINABLE.
WE ARE ALREADY SEEING THAT WITH
THE PROPOSALS THAT ARE COMING
FORTH TO THE CITY AND SO YOU
KNOW, FURTHER BRANDING THAT IS
VERY IMPORTANT BUT WE ALSO HAVE
TO BE REALLY STRATEGIC ABOUT
LOBBYING FOR UPDATES TO THE
BUILDING CODE .
THERE IS A CARBON NEUTRAL AND
CERTAINLY A MUCH MORE
SUSTAINABLE BUILDING CODE THAT
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN HAS NOT
OPTED.
WE ARE NOT ALLOWED TO ADOPT IT
UNTIL THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
DOES.
AND SO THAT IS AN EFFORT OF OUR
LOBBYING ACTIVITY.
IT'S AN ISSUE THAT WE HAVE BEEN
PAYING A LOT OF ATTENTION TO
AND WE'RE HOPEFUL THAT WE CAN
ACHIEVE THAT.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER POWERS WE
NEED FROM THE STATE AS WELL.
WE HAVE VERY, VERY LIMITED
AUTHORITY TO UTILIZE TAX
ABATEMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT
PURPOSES AND WE CAN'T OFFER
THEM FOR SUSTAINABILITY IN
BUILDINGS.
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'D LIKE
TO DISCUSS WITH THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
WE ALSO CAN'T OFFER TAX
ABATEMENTS FOR HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT.
THAT'S ANOTHER THING WE'D LIKE
TO DISCUSS WITH THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND SO WE SHOULDN'T
BE GIVING AWAY THE FARM.
AS I SAID BEFORE, PROTECTING
THE TAXABLE VALUE OF OUR
PROPERTY IS ALSO IMPORTANT.
BUT THE MORE TOOLS WE HAVE AT
OUR DISPOSAL, MORE
OPPORTUNITIES WE HAVE TO
ACHIEVE OUR PUBLIC POLICY
GOALS.
AND SO THOSE ARE THOSE ARE
THINGS THAT WE SHOULD WE SHOULD
KEEP IN MIND.
SO OUR FIRST AND MOST IMPORTANT
RECOMMENDATION IS THAT WE
ENDORSE THESE FOUR VALUES AS
THE NORTH STARS OF OUR
DEVELOPMENT POLICY TO SEND A
MESSAGE TO THE ORGANIZATION, TO
THE COMMUNITY AND TO DEVELOPERS
THAT THESE ARE THE THINGS THAT
WE WANT TO VALUE AS OUR LAND IS
DEVELOPED.
BUT THERE ARE OF COURSE MANY
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS AS WELL.
WE'VE RECOMMENDED THAT WE
CREATE AN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
OFFICE LED BY AN ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR AND STAFF
THAT PERSON WOULD LEAD THESE
EFFORTS WITHIN CITY HALL.
THERE'S A LOT OF INK INVESTED
IN THIS REPORT AND TALKING
ABOUT THE BUREAUCRACY OF CITY
HALL AND THE BUREAUCRACY OF THE
LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS AND
THE SUPERVISION OF THAT PROCESS
NEEDS TO FALL UNDER ONE PERSON
AND ONE OFFICE AND IT CURRENTLY
DOES NOT WHICH HISTORICALLY HAS
LED TO SOME DROPPED AND SOME
COMMUNICATION.
WE NEED TO BE BETTER ABOUT
THAT.
THIS PERSON WOULD ALSO BE A
PRIMARY INTERFACE WITH SPARK
HELPING TO PURSUE BUSINESS
RETENTION AND EXPANSION
OPPORTUNITIES THROUGH SPARK
THAT RIGHT NOW MAY BE SLIPPING
THROUGH OUR FINGERS AND HEADING
ELSEWHERE IN THE COUNTY OR
ELSEWHERE IN SOUTHEAST
MICHIGAN.
WE DO NOT DO VERY MUCH WITH
SMALL BUSINESS SUPPORT AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
WOULD BE IN CHARGE OF THOSE
ACTIVITIES AS WELL AND
OF COURSE AS I'VE RECOMMENDED
SOMEBODY WHO CAN KEEP AN EYE
OUT FOR A STRATEGIC
OPPORTUNITIES TO ACQUIRE
INTERESTS IN REAL PROPERTY
PURCHASE OPTIONS, LAND SALES,
THINGS LIKE THAT SO THAT THE
CITY HAS A PORT FOLIO OF TOOLS
THAT WE CAN USE TO LEVERAGE OUR
PUBLIC POLICY PRIORITIES AS
LAND GETS DEVELOPED THAT WOULD
BE THEIR JOB AS WELL TO LOOK
OUT FOR THOSE OPPORTUNITIES.
WE ALSO TALK A LOT ABOUT
CREATING AS MUCH SEPARATION AS
IS FEASIBLE BETWEEN THE SITE
PLAN AND CIVIC PLAN REVIEW
PROCESSES RIGHT NOW IN THE CITY
WE TEND TO HOLD SITE PLAN
APPROVAL UNTIL WE GET VERY DEEP
INTO CIVIC PLAN REVIEW TO THE
POINT WHERE SOMETIMES THE SITE
PLANS ARE DELAYED FOR MONTHS ON
END.
WHILE WE'RE WORKING OUT
TECHNICAL ENGINEERING ISSUES
THAT ARE REALLY ONLY
TANGENTIALLY RELATED TO THE
SITE PLAN IN OUR PEER
COMMUNITIES SITE PLANS SHOULD
REALLY BE CONSIDERED LIKE A
DIMENSION AND SPACE BUDGET FOR
A BUILDING RIGHT.
IT IS NOT INTENDED TO BE A
COMPLETE ENGINEERING OF THE
PROJECT.
IT IS INTENDED TO BE A WE HAVE
CHECKED WITH ZONING.
WE HAVE DONE BASIC
ENVIRONMENTAL AND UTILITY
CHECKS THIS IS A GENERALLY
PERMISSIBLE PROJECT.
PLEASE MOVE FORWARD TO THE
ENGINEERING PHASE.
THE REASON WHY IT'S IMPORTANT
TO SEPARATE THAT OUT IS FOR
MANY DEVELOPERS THEY CAN'T GET
FINANCING APPROVED BY THEIR
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS UNTIL
THEY HAVE THEIR ENTITLEMENTS
DONE, THEIR SITE PLAN APPROVED
AND SO THE MORE OF THAT
ENGINEERING WE'RE STUFFING THE
BEGINNING OF THE PROCESS, THE
MORE COST WE'RE PUTTING IN
TERMS OF CASH, INVESTMENT AND
DEVELOPERS.
THAT CREATES AN INCENTIVE FOR
US THAT REALLY FOR THE MOST
PART ONLY COMPANIES THAT ARE
EXTREMELY WELL CAPITALIZED AND
OUR LEGACY COMPANIES CAN
OFTENTIMES BEAR THE COST
OF DEVELOPING IN ANN ARBOR IF
WE TRULY SEPARATED THIS PROCESS
OUT AND HAD THE SITE PLAN
APPROVAL MUCH EARLIER IN THE
PROCESS WE THINK THAT WOULD
ENCOURAGE NEWER COMPANIES,
SMALLER COMPANIES CERTAINLY
MORE WOMEN AND MINORITY OWNED
DEVELOPMENT COMPANIES TO BE
INTERESTED IN DEVELOPING IN ANN
ARBOR.
>> WE WANT TO MAKE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT BETTER TIME AND MORE
IMPACTFUL FOR SITE PLANS.
I'LL GET INTO THAT INTO THE
NEXT SLIDE.
BUT I THINK THAT'S THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT IMPROVEMENT WE CAN
MAKE TO THE PROCESS.
MANY CITIZENS FIND OUR
ENGAGEMENT AND THE DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS TO BE FRUSTRATING AND
WE SHOULDN'T MAKE IT
FRUSTRATING.
WE SHOULD MAKE IT EFFECTIVE.
SO WE'LL TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THAT.
I'VE ALSO SPOKEN ABOUT
FORTIFYING STAFF FUNCTIONS,
ELIMINATING SINGLE POINTS
OF FAILURE.
WHEN I WAS HERE IN DECEMBER I
POINTED OUT THAT WE HAVE ONE
REAL ESTATE ATTORNEY WE HAVE
ONE TRANSPORTATION PLANNER.
WE HAVE ONE FLOODPLAIN EXPERT.
YOU KNOW, THERE ARE MULTIPLE
INSTANCES ACROSS THE
ORGANIZATION OR WE HAVE ONE
EMPLOYEE WHO'S IMPORTANT FOR
RESPONSIBLE FOR IMPORTANT
ASPECTS OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT
REVIEW PROCESS WHEN THOSE
EMPLOYEES ARE OUT SICK, WHEN
THEY'RE ON VACATION, WHEN
THEY'RE BURNED OUT.
THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
SLOWS OR STOPS AT TIMES AND
THAT HAS A CASCADING EFFECT ON
PROJECTS.
AND SO WE NEED TO FORTIFY THOSE
STAFF FUNCTIONS, MAKE SURE THAT
WE DON'T HAVE THESE SINGLE
POINTS OF FAILURE AND MAKE SURE
THAT WHERE WE HAVE OFFICES THAT
A LOT OF WORK RUNS THROUGH, WE
HAVE AN ADEQUATE AMOUNT
OF STAFFING TO DEAL WITH IT.
THE REPORT ALSO LISTS A SERIES
OF TECHNICAL CHANGES TO CITY
ORDINANCE THAT WOULD ELIMINATE
MINOR REGULATORY HURDLES.
I WON'T GO THROUGH ALL OF THEM
HERE BUT YOU KNOW THERE THINGS
LIKE YOU KNOW HOW WE HANDLE
LAND DIVISION IS RATHER
BUREAUCRATIC AND IT DOESN'T
NEED TO BE UNDER STATE LAW.
THERE ARE YOU KNOW HOW WE DEAL
WITH SELLING PAPER STREETS IN
THE CITY IS ALSO A VERY LONG
DRAWN OUT OVERWROUGHT PROCESS
AND THESE AREN'T REAL STREETS.
THESE ARE STREETS THAT WERE
PLANNED BUT WERE NEVER
DEVELOPED JUST A LOT OF LITTLE
PROCESSES LIKE THAT THAT CAN
SNAG DEVELOPMENTS UP AND JUST
ADD MONTHS TO THE APPROVAL
PROCESS THAT WE'RE RECOMMENDING
CLEAN UP.
AND THEN OF COURSE THERE'S AN
AMENDMENT TO CITY CHARTER WHICH
I'LL GET TO IN A MINUTE.
SO I JUST WANT TO TALK THERE
ARE A COUPLE ISSUES HERE THAT
IN DISCUSSING THIS WITH MEMBERS
OF THE COMMUNITY AND WITH
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL, WE'VE
GOTTEN SOME REALLY GOOD
FEEDBACK AND INTEREST ON THESE
TWO ISSUES AND I JUST WANTED TO
CALL THEM OUT BRIEFLY HERE AND
KIND OF REFLECT SOME OF THAT
FEEDBACK BACK TO THE COUNCIL
BECAUSE IT MAY NOT BE ENTIRELY
CAPTURED IN THE ORIGINAL
REPORT.
>> LIKE I SAID A FEW MINUTES WE
WANT TO MAKE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
MORE MEANINGFUL.
OUR PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT IS OFTEN
EXHAUSTIVE AND REDUNDANT WHICH
CAN BIAS DECISION MAKING TOWARD
THE STATUS AND PLEASE BE QUIET
.
>> IT CAN BIAS DECISION MAKING
TOWARD THE STATUS QUO AND MAKE
IT VERY FRUSTRATING FOR
COMMUNITY MEMBERS.
AND WE ALSO TEND TO ASK THE
WRONG QUESTIONS AT THE WRONG
TIMES DURING THE ENGAGEMENT
PROCESS WHICH MEANS PUBLIC
FEEDBACK IS OFTEN UNPRODUCTIVE
RIGHT NOW OUR FEEDBACK HAS A
LOT OF ENGAGEMENT VERY EARLY IN
THE PROCESS EVEN BEFORE A SITE
PLAN IS SUBMITTED AND THEN SOME
ENGAGEMENT VERY, VERY END
OF THE PROCESS WHEN IT'S
UNLIKELY THAT ANY CHANGES CAN
ACTUALLY BE MADE.
WHAT WE'RE PROPOSING IS
IMPROVEMENTS TO THE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION PROCESS.
THIS IS THE CITY
ORDINANCE THAT
REQUIRES DEVELOPERS TO HOLD
THEIR OWN MEETING RIGHT NOW
BEFORE SITE PLANS SUBMIT.
WHAT WE'RE PROPOSING IS TO LINE
THAT MEETING UP WITH SITE PLANS
AND ALSO IT IS TIMED TO WHEN
STAFF ARE ACTUALLY WORKING ON
REVIEWING A PROJECT AND THOSE
COMMENTS DON'T GET LOST IN THE
PROCESS AND WE ALSO THINK WE
MAY BE BETTER SERVED BY
EXPANDING THE NOTIFICATION FOR
THE CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
PROCESS.
RIGHT NOW WE'RE REQUIRED TO
SEND A PHYSICAL POSTCARD IN THE
MAIL TO PEOPLE WITHIN A CERTAIN
RADIUS OF WHERE THE DEVELOPMENT
IS.
BUT AS WE ALL KNOW, INTEREST IN
DEVELOPMENT IS A CITYWIDE ISSUE
.
SO WHY CAN'T WE BE DOING SOME
DIGITAL NOTIFICATION?
A CITY CALENDAR HIT OUR
PLANNING COMMISSION
SUBSCRIPTION LIST AND GET A
WIDER SWATH OF THE CITY GIVE
COMMENT ON THESE PROJECTS WHEN
WE ARE ACTUALLY REVIEWING THEM
AND WORKING ON THEM.
I THINK THAT WILL MAKE OUR SITE
PLAN PROCESS AND THE ENGAGEMENT
RELATED TO IT MUCH MORE
EFFECTIVE, MUCH LESS
FRUSTRATING FOR THE PUBLIC AND
MUCH MORE FOCUSED WHEN THE
ACTUAL VALUABLE WORK IS
HAPPENING ON SITE PLANS RATHER
THAN KIND OF HIDING IT AT THE
VERY, VERY BEGINNING OR PUSHING
IT OFF UNTIL THE VERY END.
I JUST WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE
CHARTER AMENDMENT.
THERE IS ONE SECTION IN
PARTICULAR IN THE CHARTER
SECTION FOURTEEN POINT THREE A
WHICH REQUIRES THAT ALL
TRANSACTIONS FOR INTERESTS IN
REAL PROPERTY COME BEFORE THE
COUNCIL AND RECEIVE EIGHT VOTES
REGARDLESS OF THE DOLLAR VALUE.
SO WHAT THIS MEANS IS EVERY
LEASE AGREEMENT THE CITY ENTERS
INTO EVEN THOUGH ONE DOLLAR A
YEAR LEASE AGREEMENT WE USED AN
ENTRY ENTER INTO WITH
UNIVERSITY TO RUN THE DENTAL
CLINIC COMES BEFORE THE COUNCIL
AND REQUIRES VOTES PURCHASE
OPTIONS ON PROPERTY.
NOW THESE ARE NOT ACTUAL
PURCHASES OF PROPERTY.
THESE ARE PURCHASE OPTIONS.
THEY SAY THAT THE CITY HAS THE
RIGHT OF FIRST REFUSAL SHOULD
THE PROPERTY OWNER DECIDE TO
SELL AT SOME POINT ALL PURCHASE
OPTIONS COME BACK TO THE CITY
COUNCIL AND OUR EIGHT VOTE
ITEMS OF COURSE LAND SALES AND
ACQUISITIONS TO TO THE COUNCIL.
WE KNOW THAT DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT WHICH ARE ESSENTIALLY
BUREAUCRATIC DOCUMENTS THAT ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH SITE PLANS THAT
ARE CONTRACTS WITH THE
DEVELOPERS THOSE ALL COME TO
THE CITY COUNCIL EVEN IF THE
SITE PLAN IS APPROVED ELSEWHERE
IN THE PROCESS OR SITE PLAN CAN
BE APPROVED BY PLANNING
COMMISSION ON A MAJORITY VOTE.
BUT THERE ARE CORRESPONDING
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT COMES UP
TO CITY COUNCIL AND IT'S AN
EIGHT VOTE ITEM EASEMENTS THAT
THE CITY IS INVOLVED WITH.
ALSO OUR EIGHT VOTE ITEMS THAT
COME UP TO THE COUNCIL THE
INTENT OF THE LANGUAGE IS
PRETTY CLEAR.
IT IS TO DISCOURAGE THE CITY
FROM ENGAGING IN EFFORTS TO
ALTER OR CHANGE OR IMPROVE
PROPERTY IN THE CITY.
NO MATTER HOW SMALL THE
AGREEMENT OR THE EFFORT MIGHT
BE.
SO I JUST WANT TO SAY WE CAN'T
REALLY TAKE SERIOUSLY OUR
COMMITMENT TO GET HOUSING
PRICES UNDER CONTROL OR TO
DEVELOP THE ONE DISTRICT'S OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT AS LONG AS
THIS PROVISION OF THE CHARTER
IS STILL IN EFFECT, WE NEED
MORE FLEXIBILITY TO ENGAGE IN
THE ACQUISITION AND THE
DISPOSSESSION OF PROPERTY.
SO WHAT WE'RE RECOMMENDING IS
THE SECTION SHOULD BE REPEALED
AND REPLACED WITH LANGUAGE
STIPULATE STATING THAT A
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT WILL BE
APPROVED THROUGH THE SAME
PROCESS THAT ITS CORRESPONDING
SITE PLAN IS APPROVED.
SO WHAT WOULD THAT LOOK LIKE
AND WHAT DOES THAT MEAN FOR THE
COUNCIL?
OUR STANDARD CONTRACTING
THRESHOLD WOULD GO INTO EFFECT
THE SEVENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS NOW YOU MAY BE SAYING
TO YOURSELF, JOHN, THERE IS NO
PROPERTY IN THE CITY YOU CAN
BUY FOR LESS THAN SEVENTY FIVE
THOUSAND.
THAT IS CORRECT.
PRETTY MUCH ALL LAND SALES WILL
STILL COME TO THE COUNCIL BUT
THINGS THAT WOULDN'T COME TO
THE COUNCIL NECESSARY CERTAINLY
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS LIKE I
SAID WOULD BE APPROVED IN THE
SAME PROCESS THAT THEIR
CORRESPONDING SITE PLAN IS
APPROVED PURCHASE OPTIONS ON
PROPERTY IF THE CITY IS
INTERESTED IN ACCUMULATING
PURCHASE OPTIONS AND THIS IS
PART OF A PROCESS CALLED SITE
ASSEMBLY.
RIGHT.
IF YOU NEED A COUPLE PARCELS
RIGHT NEXT TO EACH OTHER TO
BUILD FACILITY OR TO HELP AID
AND HOUSING DEVELOPMENT, MAYBE
THERE'S AN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT WE'RE INTERESTED
IN.
MAYBE THERE'S A DEVELOPER WHO
SAYS WE WANT HELP ACCUMULATING
PROPERTY SO WE CAN BUILD THIS
THING THAT'S ALLOWED BY RIGHT.
YOU'RE ZONING CODE .
IT'S GOOD TO TRY TO ACCUMULATE
THOSE OPTIONS WITH SOME
DISCRETION BECAUSE IF IT'S VERY
CLEARLY PUBLICLY KNOWN THAT
YOU'RE TRYING TO ACCUMULATE
THOSE PURCHASE OPTIONS, THAT
LAST PURCHASE OPTION IS GOING
TO BE THE MOST EXPENSIVE THING
THE CITY EVER BOUGHT.
RIGHT.
AND SO IF YOU HAVE TWO OR THREE
PARCELS THAT YOU WANT TO ADD AN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT,
IT'S GOOD TO TRY TO DO THAT
WITH SOME DISCRETION.
AND THEN WHEN THE CITY WANTED
TO ACTUALLY EXECUTE THE
PURCHASE, ALL OF THOSE
AGREEMENTS COME TO THE CITY
COUNCIL AND ARE VETTED PUBLICLY
AND THEN WE CAN MAKE A DECISION
.
THE CITY COUNCIL IS A BODY AND
THE CITY TOGETHER THROUGH A
DISCUSSION ABOUT WHETHER WE
ACTUALLY WANT TO ENGAGE IN THAT
PURCHASE OR NOT.
SO IT'S IMPORTANT TO HAVE THIS
FLEXIBILITY AND THIS ABILITY IN
THE CITY TO DO THE THINGS THAT
WE'RE RECOMMENDING IN THIS
REPORT.
>> AND THE LAST I THINK THIS IS
THE LAST SLIDE AND THEN WE CAN
HAVE SOME DISCUSSION IF YOU'RE
INTERESTED IS LIKE I SAID, THE
RESOLUTIONS FOR COUNCIL.
WE THINK THERE WILL BE MULTIPLE
RESOLUTIONS RESOLUTIONS THAT
WILL COME FORWARD TO COUNCIL IN
MARCH.
THE RESOLUTIONS WE HOPE WILL
PROVIDE CLEAR AND DURABLE
STRATEGIC DIRECTION FOR THE
CITY TO ENGAGE IN LAND
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY
PROACTIVELY.
THEY WILL PROVIDE ENDORSEMENT
FOR THE INITIATIVES AS OUTLINED
IN THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
REPORT AND AS THE COUNCIL IS
INTERESTED IN ENDORSING THEM.
AND WHAT I WILL SAY I'VE GOTTEN
SOME QUESTIONS FROM THE
COUNCIL, YOU KNOW SO THIS IS A
BIG STAGE RIGHT.
AND WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO EAT
IT ONE BITE AT A TIME.
SO HOW DO WE PRIORITIZE THIS
ONE?
SHOULD WE EXPECT THIS TO COME
BACK TO COUNCIL?
AND WHAT I WILL TELL YOU IS IT
WILL TAKE TIME TO IMPLEMENT
THESE RECOMMENDATIONS.
IT WILL GUIDE OUR WORK AT LEAST
FOR THE COMING YEAR PROBABLY
FOR LONGER.
AND AS ORDINANCE CHANGES OR
BUDGET PROPOSALS OR LEGISLATION
NATIVE INITIATIVES COME
FORWARD, WE WILL BRING THEM TO
THE COUNCIL WHEN THEY'RE READY
.
SO IT WILL BE AN ITERATIVE
PROCESS.
IT IS NOT THE KIND OF THING
WHERE WE'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO
FLIP A LIGHT SWITCH AND BINGO
BANGO WE'RE IN THE REAL ESTATE
BUSINESS RIGHT.
SO IT WILL TAKE TIME IT WILL
TAKE TIME TO GET THIS PROCESS
GOING SO WITH ALL THAT BEING
SAID, I TOOK HALF AS MUCH TIME
AS I DID IN DECEMBER.
IF THERE ARE COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS FROM THE COUNCIL I'M
HAPPY TO DISCUSS SONG.
I ACTUALLY HAVE A T-SHIRT THAT
SAYS LEGALIZE HOUSING THEY
BOUGHT THREE YEARS AGO.
SO MY QUESTION I HAVE SO MANY
QUESTIONS BUT MY FIRST IS HOW
HOW DO YOU ENVISION US
COORDINATING THIS WORK WITH THE
COUNTY WITH OKD AND SO I GUESS
THERE'S THE SECOND PART OF THAT
QUESTION WHICH IS ARE THERE
DISCUSSIONS WITH OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES IN THE COUNTY
AND HOW WE ANTICIPATE
LEGALIZING HOUSING SO IT'S MORE
NOT ONLY IN ARBER I MEAN
DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING KIND
OF GOES HAND IN HAND THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTY.
>> SURE.
AT THIS POINT NOT DETAILED
DISCUSSIONS I THINK THERE ARE
SOME COMPREHENSIVE
RECOMMENDATIONS HERE BUT I KNOW
IT'S IMPORTANT FOR MILTON AND I
BOTH TO MAKE SURE THAT WE HAD
DIRECTION FROM THE COUNCIL
BEFORE WE REALLY START MOVING
FORWARD AND TURNING OVER ROCKS
AND HAVING CONVERSATIONS.
WE HAVE HAD SOME CONVERSATION
WITH THE COUNTY THERE IN THE
PROCESS OF FINALIZING THEIR
FACILITIES PLAN WHICH YOU KNOW,
WILL HELP.
IT'S HELPING THEM REVISION WHAT
THEY'RE DOING WITH THE
PROPERTIES THAT THEY OWN,
INCLUDING PROPERTIES IN THE
DOWNTOWN PARKING LOTS,
UNDERUTILIZED BUILDINGS, THINGS
LIKE THAT.
I ENVISION SOME PARTNERSHIP
THERE IF THEY'RE INTERESTED THE
TWO WAY STREET AND OF COURSE WE
HAVE WE HAVE EXISTING STRONG
PARTNERSHIPS WITH THE HOUSING
COMMISSION, WITH AVALON
HOUSING, WITH OTHER AFFORDABLE
HOUSING OPERATORS PROVIDERS AND
I ENVISION THAT THOSE
RELATIONSHIPS WILL STRENGTHEN
FROM THIS REPORT.
AT THIS POINT THOUGH, I THINK
OUTSIDE OF THAT WE'RE WE'RE IN
THE IDEATING STAGE TO BORROW A
BUZZWORD SO COUNTERREACTION.
THANK YOU.
I WAS LOOKING BACK TO THE
DOCUMENT THAT WAS THE
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT I THINK
FED THIS RECOMMENDATION AND ONE
THING THAT STOOD OUT AS THERE
WERE SEVERAL THINGS THAT WERE
RELATED TO EFFICIENCY SEEMS TO
ME BUCKETS WERE LIKE EFFICIENCY
CULTURE AND RESPONSIVENESS,
CUSTOMER SERVICE AND SORT
LETTER INSTEAD OF THE SPIRITE
OF THE LAW.
AND SO I'M JUST CURIOUS IT
SEEMS LIKE THERE MIGHT BE SOME
LOWER HANGING FRUIT IN TERMS
OF LIKE HOW DO WE DO THINGS
FASTER SO THAT THEY'RE MORE
EFFICIENT AND CAN BE
ACCOMPLISHED MORE QUICKLY?
AND I'M WONDERING WHAT HAVE
YOUR RECOMMENDATIONS KIND
OF ADDRESSED THAT TO GET THAT?
>> SO I THINK THAT THERE IS
THERE IS A CUSTOMER SERVICE
APPROACH WITH THE CITY THAT CAN
BE AUGMENTED A LITTLE BIT.
YOU KNOW, OUR PUBLIC SERVICES
TEAM IN PARTICULAR DOES AN
EXCEPTIONAL JOB.
THEY GET INTO THE DETAILS ON
DEVELOPMENTS.
THEY ARE I THINK THEY VIEW PART
OF THEIR ROLE AS BEING
WATCHDOGS OVER THE PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE AND EVEN MORE
IMPORTANTLY THE PRIVATELY OWNED
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE INTERACT
WITH AND THAT'S CRITICALLY
IMPORTANT AND WE SHOULD NOT
LOSE THAT ETHOS AT ALL.
BUT THERE ARE TIMES WHEN I
THINK OUR NOTES BACK TO
DEVELOPERS COULD MAYBE BE A
LITTLE MORE DETAILED IN TERMS
OF WHAT THE CITY IS LOOKING
FOR.
YOU KNOW, I THINK THERE ARE
TIMES WHEN WE NEED TO BE A
LITTLE MORE FLEXIBLE IN BEING
RESPONSIVE TO DEVELOPER ASKS
AND THERE ARE THERE ARE SOME
EXAMPLES WRITTEN INTO THE
REPORT WHERE I THINK WE GO INTO
SOME DETAIL ON THAT.
BUT I THINK I WOULDN'T
NECESSARILY
CALL THAT A LOW
HANGING FRUIT BUT I THINK THAT
THAT IS A REALLY IMPORTANT
THING THAT WE WILL WANT TO WORK
ON AND EMPHASIZE ACROSS THE
ORGANIZATION IN ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR IS AN
IMPORTANT PART OF THAT RIGHT.
PART OF THE FRUSTRATION
DEVELOPERS HAVE IS THEY WANT TO
ENTER INTO THESE PROCESSES KIND
OF SIDEWAYS AND INTERRUPT THEM
TO AN EXTENT AND RE PRIORITIZE
PROJECTS SO THEY'RE GETTING THE
ANSWERS THAT THEY NEED IN A
TIMELY MANNER.
BUT WHEN THAT HAPPENS FROM THE
PERSPECTIVE OF THE CITY THAT IS
A PRIORITIZATION.
THAT MEANS THAT THE NEXT
PERSON'S PERMIT WHO'S UP ISN'T
BEING WORKED ON BECAUSE
SOMEBODY WALKED INTO CITY HALL
AND KNOCKED ON YOUR DOOR.
RIGHT.
AND SO I WANT TO DEFEND THE
INTEGRITY OF THE WORK THAT WE
DO IN THAT RESPECT IN THAT IT'S
IMPORTANT FOR US TO PRIORITIZE
THIS STUFF ON, YOU KNOW,
WHOEVER IS NEXT IN LINE IS
GETTING OUR ATTENTION.
BUT I DO THINK THAT WE CAN BE A
LITTLE MORE PRODUCTIVE IN TERMS
OF OUR FEEDBACK TO DEVELOPERS
ACKNOWLEDGING EMAILS OR PHONE
CALLS IN A TIMELY MANNER WHEN
THEY COME IN THE DOOR.
THINGS LIKE THAT PART OF THAT
IS A STAFFING PROBLEM.
I DO GO INTO DETAIL IN THE
REPORT DISCUSSING SOME OF THE
STAFFING CHALLENGES THAT WE
HAVE IN THE CITY.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S A CHART IN
THE REPORT THAT SHOWS PERMIT
ACTIVITY WE HAVE FOR
DEVELOPMENT RELATED PERMITS
BOTH THE NUMBER OF PERMITS AND
THE DOLLAR VALUE OF PERMITS HAS
DOUBLED OVER THE LAST DECADE
BUT WE HAVE THE SAME NUMBER
OF STAFF WORKING ON IT.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, THAT'S A
SITUATION THAT LEADS TO BURNOUT
.
THAT'S A SITUATION THAT LEADS
TO PEOPLE SIMPLY NOT BEING ABLE
TO RESPOND TO AN EMAIL IN A
TIMELY MANNER.
SO WHILE WE I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT FOR US TO SET THOSE
EXPECTATIONS FOR STAFF, WE ALSO
HAVE TO FOLLOW UP WITH
RESOURCES AND SUPPORTS THAT
THEY'RE IN AN ENVIRONMENT WHERE
THEY CAN SUCCEED.
COUNCIL MEMBER DESH, THANK YOU
AND THANK YOU AGAIN FOR THE
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF WORK THAT
THIS REPORT REFLECTS.
I WANTED TO I THINK THAT YOU
DETAILED THIS FAIRLY WELL BUT I
WANTED TO GO BACK TO THE POINT
ABOUT CITIZEN PARTICIPATION AND
SO AS PEOPLE KNOW, IF THEY
FOLLOW THE PLANNING COMMISSION
CLOSELY, THE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION PROCESS THAT WE
HAVE IS INVOLVED A POSTCARD TO
THE IMMEDIATE NEIGHBORHOOD AND
A MEETING HOSTED BY THE
DEVELOPER, AS YOU SAY, NOT
ALIGNED WITH THE SITE PLAN
REVIEW.
SO I THINK ALIGNING THE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION PROCESS WITH THE
SITE PLAN REVIEW IS A GREAT
IDEA.
AND THEN MY UNDERSTANDING AND
WE TALKED ABOUT IT IS THAT YOU
PROPOSE TO HAVE AN ELECTRONIC
VERSION OF THIS POSTCARD IN
ADDITION TO THE ONE THAT IS
MAILED OUT TO THE IMMEDIATE
NEIGHBORS AND EMAIL IT TO THE
PLANNING LISTSERV AS WELL AS
POSTING IT ON THE CITY WEBSITE
.
I THINK BOTH OF THOSE ARE GOOD
MEASURES.
I THINK THEY THEY CLEARLY
EXPAND WITH THE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION PROCESS IS THEY
ARE AND BECAUSE IT GOES OUT TO
THE PLANNING LISTSERV, IT'S NOT
THAT FAR REMOVED FROM
NOTIFICATION OF A PUBLIC
HEARING.
IT'S JUST NOT YET A PUBLIC
HEARING AT PLANNING COMMISSION
WHICH ISN'T AS EFFECTIVE
BECAUSE IT COMES AT THE END.
>> IS THERE ANYTHING WE CAN DO
TO MORE TO GET PEOPLE'S
ATTENTION?
I PEOPLE KNOW THERE'S A RHYTHM
TO PLANNING COMMISSION MEETINGS
.
THERE ARE ALSO THERE'S A RHYTHM
TO THOSE MEETINGS.
THERE'S NOT NECESSARILY A
RHYTHM TO THE PROCESSES THAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT RIGHT NOW.
IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE WE CAN
DO TO REACH OUT EVEN MORE?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S WORTH
DISCUSSING.
YOU KNOW, I'D WANT TO GET
FEEDBACK FROM PLANNING STAFF
BEFORE WE KIND WHEN REALLY DOWN
INTO THAT RABBIT HOLE BUT YOU
KNOW, COUNCIL OVER AN ISSUE
THAT YOU AND I TALKED ABOUT WAS
THAT THERE ARE A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO YOU KNOW, IF YOU'RE NOT
WITHIN THAT RADIUS OF THAT
PROJECT, YOUR FIRST
NOTIFICATION THAT THERE'S A
DEVELOPMENT COMING THAT YOU MAY
BE INTERESTED IN IS ACTUALLY
THE PLANNING COMMISSION AGENDA
AND IT'S REALLY VERY, VERY LATE
IN THE PROCESS AND SO, YOU
KNOW, THAT I THINK CONTRIBUTES
TO PEOPLE'S FRUSTRATION.
AND SO IF WE MOVE THE ONUS
OF THE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AWAY
FROM THE PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING AND WHEN THAT SITE
PLANS SUBMITTED IS HAPPENING
AND KIND MAKE THAT THE FOCAL
POINT OF ENGAGEMENT, I THINK WE
WILL BE IN A SITUATION WHERE
PEOPLE ARE MORE SATISFIED
BECAUSE THEY ARE BEING MORE
TIMELY NOTIFIED AND THEY'RE
GIVING COMMENTS, YOU KNOW, WHEN
IT CAN BE MORE EFFECTIVE.
WHAT THAT YOU KNOW WHAT THAT
LOOKS LIKE?
>> I THINK WE'VE GOT A LOT
OF DISCUSSION TO FIGURE THAT
OUT.
ONE MORE TINY FOLLOW UP THE THE
OTHER COMPONENT OF THE PUBLIC
HEARING THAT IS BENEFICIAL THE
CURRENT PUBLIC HEARING EVEN
THOUGH IT'S TOO LATE IS THAT
MEMBERS OF THE PLANNING
COMMISSION ARE THERE MEMBERS
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION DO
NOT USUALLY ATTEND CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION MEETINGS.
THEY OFTEN CONFLICT WITH
PLANNING COMMISSION MEETINGS OR
OTHER CITY MEETINGS AND I DON'T
THINK THAT IT WOULD BE
REASONABLE TO EXPECT EVERY
MEMBER OF PLANNING COMMISSION
TO ATTEND THOSE.
>> BUT I THINK WE MIGHT NEED A
CULTURE SHIFT AROUND HAVING THE
WARD REPS ATTEND THOSE AND
MAYBE AS YOU KNOW, SOME
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS AND THAT
WOULD REALLY MEAN THAT THE
DEVELOPERS WOULD NEED TO
COORDINATE BECAUSE MANY OF US
JUST DON'T HAVE VERY MUCH
FLEXIBILITY IN OUR EVENINGS AND
WE NEED MORE LEAD TIME IF WE
SHOULD, YOU KNOW, KEEP THAT ONE
OR TWO NIGHTS OPEN.
>> THE ONE OR TWO NIGHTS THAT
ARE FREE OFTEN FILL UP, YOU
KNOW, VERY FAR IN ADVANCE.
AND SO I THINK THAT IT WOULD BE
BENEFICIAL TO HAVE
REPRESENTATION OF OFFICIALS
ELECTED AND OTHERWISE APPOINTED
AT THOSE MEETINGS.
AND SO I HOPE THAT WE CAN WORK
ON COORDINATION IN ORDER TO
MAKE THAT POSSIBLE.
COUNCIL MEMBER IHR THANK YOU.
I ECHO THE GRATITUDE THAT
OTHERS HAVE EXPRESSED ABOUT THE
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF WORK HERE
AND JUST GENERALLY SPEAKING I'M
SO EXCITED BECAUSE THIS IS I
THINK ONE THE BIGGEST THINGS
THAT CITY COUNCIL AND STAFF
TERMS OF HOUSING AND ANDING IN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY IN OUR COMMUNITY
IN MY MEMORY REALLY A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS I WANTED TO FOLLOW
UP ON WITH THE CUSTOMER SERVICE
ASPECT OF SO AND THIS IS I FEEL
LIKE IT'S GETTING INTO THE
WEEDS AND THE RECOMMENDATIONS
THAT THAT YOU'VE GIVEN FOR US
AND THE THINGS THAT WE NEED TO
UNDERTAKE AS A COUNCIL ARE VERY
HIGH LEVEL POLICY, ET CETERA,
WHICH IS AND SOME OF THE SOME
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS IN YOUR
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT REPORT
ARE MORE ON THE MANAGEMENT
LEVEL.
SO I WAS JUST CURIOUS WHETHER
YOU MIGHT BE PURSUING SOME
OF THESE AND WE'RE IT'S NOT IN
THE REPORT TO US BECAUSE THAT'S
NOT OUR PURVIEW, PARTICULARLY
WITH REGARD TO CUSTOMERS
SERVICE THINGS LIKE PROJECT
MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE PARTNER
SYSTEM TO KEEP STAFF
ACCOUNTABLE TO EACH OTHER IN
PERSON OFFICE HOURS POTENTIALLY
FOR DEVELOPERS TO COME IN AND
GET THEIR QUESTIONS ANSWERED.
ARE THOSE THINGS THAT ARE BEING
CONSIDERED AND WE'RE IN IT'S
JUST NOT PART OF OUR PURVIEW SO
WE'RE NOT HEARING THE ANSWER TO
THAT IS YES.
I THINK THAT THE PERSON IN THE
ORGANIZATION WHO WILL BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR DRIVING THAT ON
A DAY OR DAY BASIS WILL BE THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
AND SO YOU WE WANT TO HAVE THAT
POSITION BUDGETED AND HIRED IN
PART OF THEIR PORTFOLIO WILL BE
OWNING THAT CUSTOMER SERVICE
INTERACTION THROUGHOUT THE
ORGANIZATION.
SO YOU KNOW, WE VIEW THOSE
THINGS KIND OF AS OUR YOU KNOW,
THE ADMINISTRATORS SIDE
PERSONNEL INITIATIVES BUT YES,
VERY MUCH SO.
THEY'RE ON OUR RADAR AND WE'RE
VERY INTERESTED.
>> THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S THANK
YOU AGAIN.
THIS IS A GREAT, GREAT REPORT
AND A GREAT ROADMAP FOR OUR
CITY IN TERMS OF , YOU KNOW,
MAKING SURE THAT WE'RE ACTUALLY
BUILDING THE HOUSING THAT WE
ALL WANT TO SEE.
SO JUST TO FOLLOW UP A LITTLE
MORE ON THAT LAST POINT
OBVIOUSLY IT'S GOING TO TAKE IF
THIS IS IF WE MOVE FOR THE
RECOMMENDATION OF BUILDING AN
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OFFICE, WE
TAKE SOME TIME TO GET THAT INTO
PLACE, GET SOME GET THE
APPROPRIATE PERSON HIRED AND
GET THEM UP TO SPEED IN THE
ORGANIZATION.
I'M ASSUMING SOME OF THESE
THERE ARE SOME OF THESE PIECES
RELATED CUSTOMER SERVICE THAT
WE WOULD WANT TO SEE
IMPLEMENTED A LOT SOONER THAN
THAT.
SO I JUST WANT TO REITERATE
THAT POINT THAT I THINK THAT'S
AN URGENCY FOR FOR OUR
ORGANIZATION THAT THAT FOLKS
SHOULD BE ABLE TO REACH OUT TO
TO THE CITY AND GET GET A
RESPONSE WITHIN A SORT OF A
REASONABLE AMOUNT OF TIME AND
CERTAINLY THE RECOMMENDATIONS
FROM THE SPARK REPORT AND PEER
COMMUNITIES TALK ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, RELYING ON DIFFERENT
TYPES OF TECHNOLOGIES THAT THAT
HELP TO ASSIST WHEN I ASSUME
WHEN STAFFING IS SHORT.
>> SO AND THAT KIND OF LEADS ME
TO THE QUESTION AROUND THERE
ARE A LOT OF GREAT
RECOMMENDATIONS IN THIS REPORT
AND THEN THERE'S ALSO THE
APPENDICES WHERE THERE ARE SOME
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT ARE MAYBE
NOT EXPLICITLY BUILT INTO THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT YOU PUT
FORWARD IN THIS REPORT WHETHER
IT BE FROM THE SPARK OR THE
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT.
IF THERE ARE ELEMENTS THERE
THAT WE HAVE QUESTIONS AROUND,
SHOULD WE JUST BE REACHING OUT
TO YOU IN TERMS OF SEEING IF
THOSE ARE INTEGRATED INTO
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OR IF
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT HOW WOULD
YOU I GUESS HOW WOULD YOU LIKE
TO SEE QUESTIONS BROUGHT BACK
TO YOU?
>> YOU KNOW, THERE ARE A LOT
OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE THREE
CONSULTANT REPORTS THAT ARE
VERY GOOD BUT THAT IN MY
ESTIMATION I THOUGHT
WE NEED
SOME INFRASTRUCTURE SET UP HERE
BEFORE WE CAN TAKE A SERIOUS
RUN AT THESE AND SO THEY MAY
NOT BE THE TOP RECOGNIZING IT.
IT'S ALREADY A 90 PAGE REPORT.
BUT THE THE TOP THINGS I WOULD
EMPHASIZE RIGHT NOW BUT THEY
ARE YOU KNOW, I THINK I WRITE
THIS IN MY REPORT THAT THERE
THEY ARE A TREASURE TROVE
OF GOOD IDEAS AND I THINK THAT
THEY ARE A WELL WE WILL BE
GOING BACK TO OFTEN AS WE KNOCK
ONE OF THESE RECOMMENDATIONS
OUT AND MAKE A BIG STEP
FORWARD.
WE'RE GOING TO GO BACK TO AND
SEE WHAT'S NEXT UP.
>> SO AND WHEN THE OTHER BIG
RECOMMENDATION HERE IS
OF COURSE THE CHARTER AMENDMENT
WHICH MAKES THERE'S A LOT
OF SENSE TO THAT THOSE
RECOMMENDATIONS PARTICULARLY IN
TERMS OF THE LAND ACQUISITION
SIDE OF THINGS.
BUT IF YOU COULD SPEAK A LITTLE
BIT MORE TOWARDS TOWARDS THE
SALE AND LEASING AND KIND
OF WHY YOU SEE THAT AS AN
IMPORTANT CHANGE IN THAT
THRESHOLD, I CAN THINK OF A
RECENT PROPERTY THAT WE'VE SOLD
FOR A DOLLAR TO THE THE HOUSING
COMMISSION SO THAT THAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN UNDER THE SEVENTY
FIVE THOUSAND DOLLAR THRESHOLD
.
BUT THEN OF COURSE WE'VE HAD
OTHER RECENT DISCUSSIONS AS
WELL AND SO I'M THINKING ABOUT
IF YOU COULD TALK A LITTLE BIT
YOU JUST KIND OF SEPARATING OUT
THE ACQUISITION VERSUS SALE AND
LEASING AND HOW THAT MIGHT BE
OF BENEFIT.
>> SURE.
YOU KNOW, I THINK THAT THE THE
ETHOS THAT I WOULD WANT THE
CITY TO REFLECT IS THAT IT
SHOULD JUST GENERALLY BE EASIER
TO DO THESE THINGS AND THAT
DOESN'T MEAN THAT THEY SHOULD
HAPPEN WITHOUT OVERSIGHT.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THEY SHOULD
HAPPEN WITHOUT DISCUSSION.
YOU KNOW, A TRANSACTION OF ANY
OF THESE TYPES UNDER SEVENTY
FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS IS GOING
TO BE A PRETTY MINOR
TRANSACTION.
RIGHT.
BUT IT'S THE ACCUMULATION
OF THEM OVER TIME THAT CAN HELP
THE CITY BUILD UP A PORTFOLIO
THAT ALLOWS US TO HAVE
LEVERAGE.
RIGHT.
AND SO AS IT IS NOW WITH ALL
OF THESE THINGS GOING TO
COUNCIL AND REQUIRING A
SUPERMAJORITY VOTE, IT LOWERS
INTEREST FROM OUTSIDE PARTIES.
IT TIES UP A LOT OF RESOURCES
AND THE ATTORNEYS OFFICE AND
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR'S OFFICE
IT ADDS A LOT OF TIME WHICH CAN
MAKE DEALS FALL APART.
EVEN SIMPLE DEALS FALL APART.
AND SO YOU KNOW WHAT I WOULD
SAY IS THAT BY MAKING THE
PROCESS GENERALLY EASIER WE CAN
ADD A LOT MORE VALUE EVEN IN
YOU KNOW, IF ON A ONE ON ONE
BASIS YOU MIGHT SAY, WELL, YOU
KNOW, WE LOST THAT TRANSACTION
BUT THAT'S OK BECAUSE WE HAVE
THESE OTHERS OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT OVER TIME THAT ADDS AND IT
IT REALLY HANDCUFFS OUR ABILITY
TO EFFECT PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT
OVER THE COURSE OF HISTORY OVER
THE BROAD SWEEP OF THE FUTURE
OF THE CITY, THINKS COUNCIL
MEMBER REDISH.
I WANTED TO BRING UP THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD AND I I THINK IT
MAKES A LOT OF SENSE TO
DISSOLVE IT ESPECIALLY BECAUSE
INSTEAD OPINION THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD DOESN'T ACTUALLY
HAVE ANY ABILITY TO COMPEL AND
OFTEN STAFF ACHIEVES AS MUCH AS
CAN BE ACHIEVED WITH OR WITHOUT
THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD'S
IMPACT OR INPUT.
EXCUSE ME SO IT MAKES SENSE TO
ME BECAUSE IT DOESN'T SOUND
LIKE IT HAS IT TAKES A LOT
OF TIME BUT HAS LITTLE IMPACT
SO WE'D RATHER SEE THAT
REVERSED LESS TIME, MORE IMPACT
.
>> SO UM SO I I I WONDER IF
IT'S POSSIBLE TO GET SOME
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM STAFF AS
TO HOW THEY WILL JUST SOME
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO
HOW THEY WILL INCORPORATE THE
BEST PIECES OF DESIGN REVIEW
INTO SITE PLAN REVIEW AND OTHER
PARTS OF THE PROCESS THAT ARE
ALREADY HAPPENING IN THE
ORGANIZATION BECAUSE IT WOULD
BE VERY HELPFUL BECAUSE BECAUSE
ONE OF THE BIGGEST CONCERNS
THAT WE HEAR AND I THINK WE
HEARD THIS RAISED WHEN WELL
ACTUALLY NEVER MIND SORRY ONE
OF THE BIGGEST CONCERNS THAT
WE'RE HEARING IS THAT PEOPLE
FEEL THAT A LOT OF THE NEW
BUILDINGS THAT WE HAVE JUST
AREN'T THAT NICE LOOKING.
>> AND I THINK IF WE'RE GOING
TO SAY WE'RE GOING TO REMOVE
THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD, THEY
WILL SEE THAT AS A STEP AWAY
FROM WHERE WE NEED TO BE GOING
AND SO WE NEED TO HAVE
SOMETHING READY TO HAND SAY TO
THEM BUT WE'RE GOING TO DO THAT
BETTER AND WE'RE GOING TO GIVE
IT TEETH IN THE FOLLOWING THREE
WAYS.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO BE EXTENSIVE
BUT IT WOULD BE REALLY HELPFUL
TO HAVE THAT ARTICULATED.
>> SURE.
YOU KNOW, I THINK WHAT OUR
PROPOSAL IS IS TO MAKE YOU
KNOW, IT'S IMPORTANT TO
SEPARATE THE DESIGN REVIEW
GUIDELINES FROM THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD.
RIGHT.
THE DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES
WILL STILL VERY MUCH EXIST AND
WE'LL STILL BE A PART OF THE
PLANNING REVIEW PROCESS.
WHAT WE WOULD LIKE TO DO IS
MAKE THAT A PART OF THE FORMAL
PLANNING REVIEW SO THAT THE
PLANNERS ARE EVALUATING THESE
PROJECTS BASED ON THE DESIGN
REVIEW GUIDELINES AND THEN
PROVIDING FORMAL WRITTEN
FEEDBACK BACK TO DEVELOPERS
THROUGH THAT PROCESS.
WE THINK THAT BY HAVING THE
PROFESSIONAL PLANNERS
CONSOLIDATE THAT FEEDBACK IT
WILL BE MORE CONSISTENT AND
MORE DIRECT AND MAYBE A LITTLE
MORE EFFECTIVE AT GETTING SOME
CONCESSIONS OR COMPLAINTS FROM
DEVELOPERS.
YOU KNOW, SOMETIMES THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARDS COMMENTS CAN BE
CONFLICTING.
YOU KNOW, SOMETIMES THEY CAN
WANDER FROM THE DESIGN REVIEW
GUIDELINES IN WAYS THAT ARE NOT
NOT PARTICULARLY PRODUCTIVE FOR
OUR PLANNING PROCESS.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, WE THINK THAT
BY HAVING PROFESSIONAL PLANNERS
DO THAT PORTION OF THE REVIEW
WE CAN MAYBE BE A LITTLE MORE
EFFECTIVE AT IT COUNT DOWN SOME
ROSOL.
SO CAN WE TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT FINANCING FOR I I'M
LOOKING AT THIS ANCIENT ANCIENT
ORACLE FROM 2010 BY RYAN
STANTON ON THE POSSIBILITY
OF WASHTENAW BECOMING A ACTIVE
LIVING CORRIDOR.
>> SO WITH A QUARTER
IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY AND I
HAVEN'T HEARD THAT DISCUSSION
COME BACK WHERE WE CAN THINK
ABOUT EXPANDING UPON WHAT WE'VE
DONE DOWNTOWN WITH THE DENHA.
RIGHT.
OR TALK ABOUT HOW WE CAN LEVY
FUNDS THESE QUARTER IMPROVEMENT
AUTHORITIES ESPECIALLY AS WE
DIPLOMATS WROTE IN WASHINGTON
RTC ONE HOW DO WE THINK ABOUT
FUNDING FINANCING IN LIGHT
OF HOW THIS HAS BEEN WHAT A 14
YEAR DISCUSSION ABOUT THIS
POSSIBILITY BEFORE WE'VE
RESOLVED AND THEN HOW THAT
ALIGNS WITH SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT ARE GOING ON IN THE STATE
AND FEDERALLY?
RIGHT.
I THINK THERE'S CONVERSATION IN
CONGRESS ABOUT EXTENDING THE
LYTIC TAX CREDITS.
I THINK WE'RE AT TWENTY
EIGHTEEN THAT LEVEL OF THE
LIGHT CREDITS BEING EXTENDED
PERMANENTLY.
SO WHAT DOES THAT MEAN FOR US
AND WHAT CAN THAT MEAN FOR OUR
PARTNERSHIPS AND IN DEVELOPING
WHAT WE NEED TO DEVELOP?
>> I THINK WHAT GREAT QUESTION
THERE'S A LOT OF COMPONENTS TO
IT SO LET ME TRY TO KNOCK THEM
OUT ONE AT A TIME UNWASHED I
HAVE AN IDEA THERE'S THERE'S A
CHALLENGE WITH THAT VISION
BECAUSE THAT IS A STATE DOWN TO
TRUNK LINE AND YOU KNOW WHAT
HAS I THINK A DIFFERENT
PHILOSOPHY ORIENTATION THAN
LOCAL TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS
TO WHICH YOU KNOW, WE'RE WE'RE
MORE PEDESTRIAN FOCUSED.
WE'RE MORE SAFETY FOCUSED FOR
PEOPLE WHO ARE WITHIN THE RIGHT
OF WAY AND MULTIMODAL
CAPACITIES THAT IS REALLY NOT
IT'S ABOUT VEHICLE THROUGHPUT
AS QUICKLY AND EFFICIENTLY AS
POSSIBLE AND THAT'S THAT
PRESENTS A CHALLENGE FOR THE
REIMAGINING WASHTENAW
INITIATIVE.
NOT MAYBE NOT AN INSURMOUNTABLE
CHALLENGE BUT IT'S CERTAINLY A
CHALLENGE.
SO YOU KNOW, THEN THE QUESTION
TURNS TO OUR WHIFFING
AUTHORITIES UNDER THE STATE WE
HAVE VERY LIMITED TESTING
AUTHORITY SETS TAX INCREMENT
FINANCING, YOU KNOW, A CORRIDOR
IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT IS
ENVISIONED AND DESIGNED TO BE
LIKE A SECOND DENHA BUT THE
TAXING POWERS ARE VERY LIMITED
.
A CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
CAN ONLY TIFE CITY PROPERTY TAX
IF WE WANT TO CAPTURE ALL
TAXING BODIES.
THE ONLY WAY TO DO THAT IS
THROUGH A BROWNFIELD TEF WHICH
YOU CAN ONLY GET IF THERE IS A
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION
THAT NEEDS TO BE REMEDIATED OR
THE STATE LAW DID RECENTLY
CHANGE.
IF YOU MAKE A THRESHOLD
COMMITMENT TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING BUT THE DEVELOPER NEEDS
TO BE DIRECTLY SUBSIDIZING THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RIGHT THAT
RECENT CHANGE BY THE
LEGISLATURE AND BY GOVERNOR
WITTMER IS A SEA CHANGE IN THE
STATE MICHIGAN WHERE
MUNICIPALITIES COMPARED TO OUR
PEER CITIES AND OTHER STATES
HAVE ALMOST NO TOOLS TO FOR
LOCAL DEVELOPMENT FINANCING.
YOU KNOW, I WORKED IN
PITTSBURGH FOR A NUMBER
OF YEARS AND THE MAYOR'S OFFICE
IN PITTSBURGH AND IT WAS LIKE
WE HAVE LIKE A SWISS ARMY KNIFE
ON EACH FINGER FOR THE STUFF
THAT WE CAN DO RIGHT HERE.
>> WE DON'T HAVE THAT IN IN
MICHIGAN AND SO IT WILL TAKE
CHANGES IN STATE LAW AND REALLY
A CULTURE SHIFT I THINK AMONG
OUR ST. POLICYMAKERS TO
UNDERSTAND THE IMPORTANCE
OF THOSE DEVELOPMENT TOOLS TO
PROMOTE HOUSING AND MULTIMODAL
USES IN TRANSIT ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT AND WALKABILITY AND
THE WHOLE NINE YARDS.
SO I THINK I THINK THAT'S
THAT'S REALLY IMPORTANT.
YOU KNOW, ON THE HIGH TECH
QUESTION, I THINK YOU MAY BE
SKIRTING A LITTLE BIT OUTSIDE
OF MY EXPERTIZE.
SO I I'LL PICK THAT ONE UP AT A
LATER TIME.
BUT I KNOW WE WERE YOU KNOW THE
EXTENSION OF HIGH TECH WAS
CERTAINLY IMPORTANT FOR US.
SO WE JUST GENERALLY NEED MORE
TOOLS.
YOU KNOW, ONE WHEN I WAS
WORKING I WAS THE DEPUTY CHIEF
OF STAFF TO THE MAYOR WHEN I
WAS WORKING IN PITTSBURGH AND
I'M FROM MICHIGAN ORIGINALLY
AND I WOULD ALWAYS GET
QUESTIONS FROM MY FRIENDS IN
MICHIGAN WHO WORKED IN STATE
GOVERNMENT OR CITY GOVERNMENT
AND THEY'D SAY HOW IS IT THAT
PITTSBURGH REVITALIZED ITSELF
SO WELL AFTER THE COLLAPSE
OF THE STEEL INDUSTRY?
BUT SO MANY CITIES ESPECIALLY
IN MICHIGAN HAVE HAD SUCH A
DIFFICULT TIME DOING IT AND
THERE ARE A LOT OF IMPORTANT
ANSWERS TO THAT.
PITTSBURGH HAS A LEGACY
PHILANTHROPIC COMMUNITY THAT
REALLY LED THE CHARGE RIGHT FOR
CREATING PLACEMAKING
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE CITY.
THE CITY'S CULTURAL DISTRICT.
YOU KNOW, MAJOR PUBLIC WORKS
PROJECTS IN THE DOWNTOWN
REVITALIZE USING THE WATERFRONT
WHICH WAS EXCLUSIVELY STEEL
MILLS FOR DECADES NOW IS ONE
OF THE MOST BEAUTIFUL
WATERFRONTS IN THE COUNTRY
RIGHT.
THAT WAS IMPORTANT.
BUT THE DEVELOPMENT TOOLS THAT
MUNICIPALITIES IN PENNSYLVANIA
HAVE AT THEIR DISPOSAL ARE
ADVANCED AND VERY EFFECTIVE AND
WE HAVE ALMOST NONE OF THEM.
SO THAT IS AN IMPORTANT PART
OF THE STORY TOO.
AND IT'S AN IMPORTANT PART
OF THE STORY THAT WE NEED TO BE
TELLING IN LANSING SO THAT
PEOPLE GET REAL NUTS AND BOLTS
ANSWERS TO THAT QUESTION NOT
JUST THINK PIECES IN THE NEW
YORK TIMES COMPARING PITTSBURGH
TO DETROIT BECAUSE THAT'S NOT
HELPFUL RIGHT FOR THE
DISCUSSION
.
>> I JUST I'D LIKE TO ASK MR.
FOURNIER MR. ROMNEY, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH FOR THIS.
THERE IS A LOT TO A LOT TO
LIKE.
WE OF COURSE HAVE A GREAT CITY.
WE KNOW WE HAVE ARTIFICIALLY
CONSTRAINED HOUSING SUPPLY FOR
FOR QUITE SOME TIME NOW AND I
THINK WE SEE BOTH HERE IN IN
OUR IN OUR HOMETOWN AND
ELSEWHERE THROUGHOUT THE
COUNTRY I ADDICTION THAT THAT
THAT CREATES HOUSING MARKET
THAT'S OUT OF WHACK AND CREATES
A HOUSING MARKET WHERE
AFFORDABILITY IS A REAL PROBLEM
,WHERE INCLUSIVENESS IS A REAL
PROBLEM AND WE'RE DOING
EVERYTHING WE CAN HERE TO TO
COUNTERACT THAT LEGACY.
AND ONE OF THE ONE OF THOSE
EFFORTS IS EXEMPLIFIED IN THIS
DOCUMENT.
AND SO THANKS TO A THANKS TO
YOU AND YOUR THANK YOU
.
I JUST WANTED TO MAKE ONE POINT
GOES TO THE QUESTION THAT
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS RAISED THE
CUSTOMER SERVICE ISSUE IS
BROADER THAN DEVELOPMENT.
THAT'S JUST ONE SEGMENT WE HAVE
CUSTOMER SERVICE CHALLENGES IN
OTHER PARTS OF THE GOVERNMENT
THAT HAVE NOTHING TO DO WITH
DEVELOPMENT.
AND SO FOR US TO IMPROVE THERE
THAT'S WHERE STAFF TRAINING
COMES IN.
THAT'S WHERE HAVING A CUSTOMER
SERVICE PHILOSOPHY COMES IN.
THOSE THINGS WE ARE WORKING ON
IT'S SEPARATE FROM WHAT JOHN'S
TALKING TO YOU ABOUT.
WE ALSO HAVE AN INTERNAL
CHALLENGE WITH CUSTOMER SERVICE
WITH EACH OTHER.
>> EVERYBODY'S BUSY.
>> SO JOH WORKS ON THE FIFTH
FLOOR NUMBER ON THE THIRD
FLOOR.
JOHN SENDS ME AN EMAIL.
HE SENDS TEXTS, HE SENDS A MEMO
BECAUSE I KNOW JOHN AND I'M
BUSY.
I MIGHT GET BACK TO HIM BECAUSE
I'M DOING OTHER THINGS.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO ADDRESS THE
INTERNAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
COWORKERS AT THE SAME TIME IT
ALL FITS TOGETHER.
BUT I DIDN'T WANT YOU TO LEAVE
OR HAVE THE PUBLIC THINK THAT
CUSTOMER SERVICE IS ONLY GOING
TO BE FOCUSED PEOPLE DOING
BUSINESS AS IT RELATES TO
DEVELOPMENT BECAUSE THAT WOULD
BE INACCURATE.
THANK YOU.
WELCOME TO PUBLIC COMMENT
GENERAL TIME PUBLIC COMMENT.
GENERAL TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT GENERAL TIME
ONE NEED NOT HAVE SIGNED AN
ADVANCE.
SPEAKERS WILL HAVE THREE
MINUTES IN WHICH TO SPEAK SO
PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION TO
THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE TIME
CLERK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY
SECONDS REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
TIME'S EXPIRED WHEN YOUR TIME'S
EXPIRED PLEASE CONCLUDE REMARKS
AND CEDE THE FLOOR.
>> IS THERE ANYONE WHO WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC
COMMENT?
YES.
OH YOU'VE STARTED THE CLOCK.
MY NAME MY NAME IS BLAINE
COLEMAN AND I'M HERE TO URGE
THE CITY COUNCIL OF ANN ARBOR
TO APPROVE A RESOLUTION AGAINST
MILITARY AID TO ISRAEL AGAINST
MILITARY AID TO ISRAEL.
AS YOU KNOW, ISRAEL HAS KILLED
ABOUT A HUNDRED WELL HAS KILLED
AND INJURED AND BURIED UNDER
RUBBLE ABOUT A HUNDRED THOUSAND
PALESTINIAN PEOPLE IN GAZA,
MOSTLY CHILDREN AND WOMEN WITH
YOUR TAX MONEY, WITH YOUR
MILITARY SUPPORT.
AND IT'S TIME FOR ANN ARBOR
CITY COUNCIL TO JOIN THE
MINNEAPOLIS CITY COUNCIL WHICH
HAS APPROVED A RESOLUTION WHICH
HAS APPROVED A RESOLUTION
AGAINST MILITARY AID TO ISRAEL.
IT'S TIME FOR HARBOR CITY
COUNCIL TO JOIN THE RICHMOND,
CALIFORNIA CITY COUNCIL WHICH
HAS APPROVED A RESOLUTION
AGAINST MILITARY AID TO ISRAEL
.
>> IT'S TIME I REMEMBER THE
VIETNAM WAR WHEN THE UNITED
STATES WAS BUSY KILLING
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE IN VIETNAM
AND PUBLIC LIFE IN AMERICA TO A
LARGE EXTENT WENT ON VERY
NORMALLY LIKE THIS.
I'M SURE CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS
STARTED OUT THE SAME WAY AS
THEY DO HERE WITH A WHOLE LOT
OF LAUGHING AND JOLLY REPARTEE
BETWEEN CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
BUT THE UNITED STATES WAS
KILLING MILLIONS OF VIETNAMESE
PEOPLE.
>> NOW IN THE UNITED STATES YOU
SEE THE SAME PHENOMENON A WHOLE
LOT OF JOLLY REGULAR LOOKING
PUBLIC LIFE INCLUDING BY ANN
ARBOR CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
WELL, THEIR GOVERNMENT THE US
GOVERNMENT IS BUSY DOING
EVERYTHING IT CAN TO SUPPLY
ISRAEL WITH TO TURN BOMBS TO
KILL PALESTINIANS WHILE THE US
GOVERNMENT CURRENTLY LED BY THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY IS MURDERING
AS MANY PALESTINIANS AS IT
POSSIBLY CAN TOGETHER WITH
ISRAEL, OF COURSE THIS WILL
CONTINUE WHEN THE REPUBLICANS
TAKE OVER OUR JOB AS HUMAN
BEINGS IS TO DEMAND AT LEAST A
RESOLUTION AGAINST MILITARY AID
TO ISRAEL.
MINNEAPOLIS CITY COUNCIL IN
RICHMOND, CALIFORNIA CITY
COUNCIL AND BAGHDAD.
THE ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL WILL
DO THE SAME.
WE'LL DO THE SAME.
I'M DONE.
THANK YOU.
>> I WANT TO SHOW HELLO NABIL.
YOU KNOW YOU HAVE PROBLEMS.
I'M TALKING TO THE CITY COUNCIL
HERE.
YOU KNOW HOW YOU HAVE PROBLEMS
WITH PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT BECAUSE
DECADE AFTER DECADE THIS CITY
COUNCIL HAS SAT HERE AND TALKED
ABOUT AFFORDABLE HOUSING,
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
HOW ABOUT AFFORDABLE HOUSING
YET IN THESE DECADES PEOPLE
WORKING PEOPLE, PEOPLE OF LOW
AND MIDDLE INCOME HAVE HAD TO
LEAVE THIS TOWN AND INSTEAD
OF THEM THE WEALTHY, THE RICH
HAVE MOVED IN.
THE CITY HAS BECOME MORE AND
MORE SEGREGATED AND THE HOUSING
HAS BECOME MORE AND MORE
EXPENSIVE.
SO WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND HOW HARD
YOU'RE WORKING TO MAKE THAT
POSSIBLE, THE PUBLIC LOOKS AT
YOU AND LAUGHS BECAUSE YOU'VE
MADE SURE THEY KNOW THAT YOUR
POLICY BENEFITS THE DEVELOPERS
AND NOT THE PUBLIC.
I KNOW IT.
THAT'S WHY THEY'RE NOT HERE.
WHEN YOU SAY YOU CARE ABOUT
PUBLIC HOUSING AND PEOPLE, IT'S
LIKE WHEN ISRAEL SAYS THEY CARE
ABOUT HUMAN RIGHTS WHILE THEY
ARE MASSACRING PEOPLE, WHY THEY
ARE BOMBING PEOPLE WHILE
THEY'RE TORTURING PEOPLE THEY
SAY THEY CARE ABOUT HUMAN
RIGHTS IN GAZA ONE PERCENT
OF CHILDREN HAVE BEEN MURDERED
WITH YOUR TAXES PUT YOUR
BLESSING BECAUSE YOU HAVE NOT
FOUND IT IN YOUR HEARTS TO SAY
ONE THING TO SAY ONE THING
ABOUT THIS GENOCIDE YOU WERE
FORCED BY HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE
WHO CAME HERE TO SAY BILATERAL
CEASEFIRE WHICH MEANS NOTHING.
YOU GUYS YOU PROGRESSIVES HAVE
SAID NOT ONE WORD ABOUT THE
DESTRUCTION OF GAZA, ABOUT
MURDER OF HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS
OF PEOPLE ONE PERCENT
OF CHILDREN IF THEY DIED HERE
WITH THE BOMBINGS OF A
NEIGHBORING COUNTRY, YOU WOULD
MEAN 700000 CHILDREN LET THAT
SINK IN MISSOULIAN SONG
GIGGLING AND LAUGHING ABOUT HOW
YOU WERE HAVING A GREAT TIME
AND WATCHING THE GAME YOUR
PARTY, YOUR TAX DOLLARS TO THE
CHILDREN IN GAZA IN WHEN I LOOK
AT YOU I ONLY SEE PEOPLE WHO
WORK FOR MONEY FOR RICH PEOPLE
AND THEY DON'T GIVE A RAT'S
ABOUT THE PUBLIC ABOUT PEOPLE
OF GAZA.
THAT'S WHAT I SEE AND THAT'S
WHAT THE WORLD SEES YOU AMERICA
YOUR SYSTEM OF GOVERNANCE HAS
NOTHING LEFT.
YOU HAVE BIDEN AND TRUMP THINK
ABOUT IT.
YOUR SYSTEM IS CRUMBLING,
FAILING ON ITSELF.
THANK YOU.
THIS IS SOMETHING THANK YOU FOR
A SOLUTION WHICH WE'VE BEEN
WORKING FOR FOR DECADES AID TO
THAT ZIONIST NAZI STATE
OF ISRAEL.
>> THANK YOU.
SHAME ON YOU SAM.
YOU THANK YOU MADAM OR ANYONE
ELSE WHO LIKE TO SPEAK IN
PUBLIC.
>> PLEASE JUST COME ON UP MAN
COULD YOU PLEASE OR MR. COLEMAN
COULD YOU PLEASE RETRIEVE THAT
SIGN?
I DON'T GET IT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
YOU KNOW, I YOU'RE A RACIST
MAYOR.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR HELP.
YOUR RACIST MAYOR.
THANK YOU.
YES.
I JUST THOUGHT YOU SAID FROM
MA'AM HI EVERYONE.
MY RESOLUTION THIS YEAR IS MORE
MONEY AND LESS BECAUSE WANT THE
TRUTH IT'S A HARD BED.
I DON'T ACTUALLY KNOW WHAT WANT
TO TALK ABOUT TONIGHT BUT I
KNOW THAT THE PASSION TO BRING
EVERY COUNCIL MEETING FOR AS
LONG AS I CAN REMEMBER AND I
WENT TO SCHOOL HERE IN TWO
THOUSAND AND TWO IS PROFOUND.
>> IT'S IT'S HUMAN.
IT'S ALL OF THE THINGS THAT
GENTRIFICATION CAN WIPE OUT
OF A CITY INTELLECT CAN WIPE
OUT OF A HUMAN.
UM, I THINK THAT THESE ARE SOME
THINGS THAT WE HAVE SET UP AND
TALKED ABOUT TONIGHT AND I DID
A COUPLE OF NOTES BECAUSE I
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT I DO THE
I THINGS I WANT TO TALK ABOUT.
>> UM, I WONDER AS GENOCIDE JOE
IS GETTING NINETY FIVE PERCENT
OF A WRITE IN VOTE.
HE'S NOT BEEN ASKING THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE TO VOTE FOR HIM
IN.
NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF PEOPLE
ARE SHOWING UP FOR HIM AND I'M
THINKING ABOUT THE TRILLION
DOLLAR WAR BUDGET A TRILLION
DOLLARS TRILLION EVERY YEAR AND
I'M THINKING ABOUT THERE IS NO
DEPARTMENT OF PEACE, THERE IS
NO DEPARTMENT OF CREATION AND
I'M THINKING ABOUT ANN ARBOR,
THIS GORGEOUS CONSISTENTLY
RANKED BEST IN THE NATION AND
AS SOMEONE WHO TRIES TO ENGAGE
ALL MY CHAKRAS, I TRY TO ENGAGE
WHAT IT MEANS TO JUST BE A
RATIONAL PERSON PLAYING IN THE
FIELDS OF SCIENCE AND ALSO
SOMEONE WHO CAN BE WOOED BY BY
EMOTION, BY ART, BY COLOR, BY
NATURE, BY SUNSET.
RIGHT.
I IT'S HARD TO INTELLECTUALIZE
A SUNSET AND SO I JUST I WONDER
IF THERE'S ROOM TO ZOOM OUT AND
SEE OURSELVES FROM SPACE WHERE
WE ARE IRREVOCABLY ENTANGLED.
RIGHT.
RUSSIA YOU UKRAINE, PALESTINE,
ISRAEL, BLACK, WHITE OHIO,
MICHIGAN AND IS OUR DOGGED
DEVOTION TO PATRIOTISM GO BLUE
OR WHATEVER IT IS THAT IS THAT
EXTREME MONOTHEISM THAT
PERMEATES EVERY OUNCE OF OF OUR
OF OUR WAKING LIVES WHERE WE WE
LIVE THE BINARY AND ANYONE WHO
PROMISES EVEN A GLIMPSE OF THE
NON BINARY LIFESTYLE SOMEONE
WHO JUST WALKS DOWN AND AS A
WHITE DUDE JUST WITH EARRINGS
SUDDENLY I'M LIKE OR HULA
HOOPING AND SO AND SO AND SO I
THINK COUNCIL COUNCILPERSONS
SONG YOU MENTIONED ABOUT ANN
ARBOR BEING A WEIRD PLACE WITH
A SENSE OF PRIDE.
I THINK WE SHOULD HAVE THAT AND
I JUST WONDER WHAT DOES THAT
MEAN IN AN EMBODIED SENSE?
WHAT MAKES ANN ARBOR WEIRD AS
WE'RE CELEBRATING THE 200 YEAR
ANNIVERSARY OF THIS PLACE
STARTED TO THINK ABOUT
INVESTING.
WE TALK ABOUT INVESTING IN
PUBLIC SPACE AND MAKING IT
PROVOCATIVE PLUS PBS.
SO IF YOU WATCH WHY IS THAT?
I THINK THAT THERE IS ROOM FOR
US TO INVEST IN ADULT NEUTRAL
ZONE AND ADULT NEUTRAL ZONE
LIKE CULTURAL AMBASSADORS.
I WILL FOLLOW UP ON THIS BUT I
JUST REALLY, REALLY, REALLY
EMBODIED EMBODIED MATTERS.
GOD BLESS YOU ALL.
LET'S JUST GET A THANK YOU
GOOD
KATHY GRISWOLD.
I REALLY APPRECIATED WHAT
MILTON RAJANI SAID BECAUSE WHEN
JOHN FOURNIER WAS TALKING ABOUT
DEVELOPMENT I WAS THINKING WE
COULD JUST REPLACE DEVELOPMENT
AND HOUSING AND AFFORDABILITY
WITH MY FAVORITE TOPIC
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY AND TRULY WE
HAVE PROCESS PROBLEMS AND WE
HAVE PROCESS PROBLEMS IN THIS
CITY BECAUSE WE HAVE CULTURAL
PROBLEMS AND WE'VE HAD THOSE
CULTURAL PROBLEMS FOR ABOUT
THIRTY YEARS.
I REMEMBER ROGER FRAIZER DID A
STAFF SURVEY AND THE RESULTS
WERE SO BAD HE NEVER DID
ANOTHER ONE AND I'M NOT SURE
WE'VE HAD ONE SINCE THEN.
BUT ANYWAY, SOME GOOD NEWS .
HOBOKEN, NEW JERSEY IMPLEMENTED
VISION ZERO ALL VISION ZERO.
THEY DIDN'T JUST PICK AND
CHOOSE JUST ANNOUNCE THE
SEVENTH YEAR OF NO
TRANSPORTATION FATALITIES SEVEN
YEARS THAT IS POSSIBLE FOR ANN
ARBOR IF WE RIGHT.
AND IN LOOKING AT WHAT THEY DO,
THEY DON'T EVEN MENTION
ILLUMINATION BECAUSE
ILLUMINATION IS IN ANYTHING NEW
OR SPECIAL.
ILLUMINATION IS SOMETHING YOU
DO DAY AFTER DAY AND YOU TAKE
IT FOR GRANTED.
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY ADMINISTRATION STATE
LIGHTING CAN REDUCE CRASHES UP
TO FORTY TWO PERCENT FOR
NIGHTTIME INJURY.
PEDESTRIAN CRASHES AT
INTERSECTIONS.
I ASSUME THAT NOW APPLIES TO
CROSSWALKS WITH RFID IN TWENTY
NINETEEN CENTRAL STUDENT
GOVERNMENT PASTEURIZE SOLUTION
UNANIMOUSLY AND IT WAS TO
IMPROVE PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
INCLUDING ILLUMINATION ON
CAMPUS AND IN THE NEAR CAMPUS
AREA.
I'M GOING TO GIVE THIS TO THE
CITY CLERK AFTER I SPEAK
BECAUSE I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
THAT IT BE REINTRODUCED TO THIS
NEW COUNCIL.
>> LASTLY, THE KINGS SCHOOL
ACROSS WALKS.
WHAT PEOPLE ASK ME IS CATHY IS
THIS PERSONAL?
WHY WOULD THEY PUT CHILDREN AT
RISK?
BECAUSE YOU SPEAK TOO MUCH
BECAUSE YOU SAY THINGS I DON'T
KNOW.
BUT IF THERE'S SOMETHING THAT I
NEED TO DO, STOP COMING, COME
MORE OFTEN, SAY POSITIVE THINGS
.
I WILL DO IT BECAUSE THIS HAS
BEEN AN ISSUE NOW FOR A COUPLE
OF YEARS AND I'VE GIVEN YOU THE
EVIDENCE THAT THIS IS A PUBLIC
WALKWAY.
THESE ARE PUBLIC CROSSWALKS.
THE FACT THAT STAFF WILL NOT
UPGRADE THEM AND PUT CROSSWALKS
WHERE THEY BELONG, IT'S JUST
MIND BOGGLING.
SO PLEASE TELL ME WHAT I CAN DO
SO THAT STAFF JUST DOES WHAT
THEY DO.
IT MOST OF THE OTHER CROSSWALKS
IN TOWN.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
GREETINGS.
LEWIS VASQUEZ, RESIDENT OF THE
FIRST WARD LIVE IN UPPER LOWER
TOWN.
>> I WOULD LIKE FOR COUNCIL
AFTER HEARING THESE
PRESENTATIONS TO CONSIDER A
RESOLUTION TO IT'S A KIND OF A
AND YOU KNOW, I'M NOT AFRAID
OF SAYING PUT UP OR SHUT UP
RIGHT.
AND I'VE ASKED THIS OF COUNCIL
MEMBERS BEFORE TO PUT UP A
RESOLUTION THAT WOULD EITHER
FUND A PARK THROUGH A MILLAGE
ON THE LIBRARY LOT OR IF IT
FAILS TO HAVE IT REVERT BACK TO
THE PRE 2018 LANGUAGE OF THE
CITY CHARTER.
I'M ABOUT TO RETIRE FROM MY JOB
AND I'M WILLING TO SOLICIT A
PETITION SIGNATURES FOR A
BALLOT PROPOSAL OF SUCH KIND
AND I WOULD LOVE TO WORK WITH
COUNCIL MEMBERS.
I WOULD LOVE TO WORK WITH THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR ON CRAFTING
THIS KIND OF RESOLUTION BECAUSE
THAT LIBRARY LOT IT'S IT'S IT
HAS FAILED THE TWENTY EIGHTEEN
MEASURE THAT ENSHRINE IN A PARK
OR A COMMONS IN IN IN THE CITY
CHARTER IT IT HAS PRODUCED
NOTHING IN SIX YEARS AND WE
NEED THAT PROPERTY TO BE
REASONABLE AND BASICALLY OK SO
I WOULD LOVE TO TALK WITH YOU
ALL ABOUT THAT AND I WOULD
PERHAPS BE ABLE TO CHAMPION
SUCH A PROPOSAL AND WOULD NEED
YOUR HELP IN CRAFTING THE
LANGUAGE FOR SUCH A PROPOSAL.
SO THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE CAN
DO SOMETHING ABOUT AS OPPOSED
TO SOME OF THE PREVIOUS
SPEAKERS IN BARBER IS A SPECIAL
PLACE IT DESERVES TO HAVE MORE
DEVELOPMENT, MORE DENSITY.
YOU ARE ON THE RIGHT TRACK.
WE NEED TO MOVE FORWARD.
>> SO THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE LIKE TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT
?
THANK YOU.
MAYOR TAYLOR KING.
OUR SECOND WORD
I KNOW SOME
OF YOU PERSONALLY AND I KNOW
THAT YOU CARE DEEPLY ABOUT
MAKING THAT A MORE INCLUSIVE
PLACE AND FOR TRYING TO SOLVE
THE HOUSING CRISIS AND THE
AFFORDABILITY CRISIS HERE.
AND I IN FACT I KNOW THAT'S
TRUE OF ALL OF YOU IN THIS BODY
SO I APPRECIATE THAT AND I
APPRECIATE MUCH OF WHAT'S IN
THIS REPORT TOWARDS ACHIEVING
THAT END.
THAT SAID, I OPPOSE THE
PROPOSAL TO ELIMINATE THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
CYPRIEN A PUBLIC HEARING WHICH
IS WHAT'S BEING PROPOSED HERE
IN THE GUISE OF MAKING PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT BETTER TIMED AND
MORE IMPACTFUL END QUOTE.
MOVING UP THE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION MEETING AND
MAKING NOTICE WIDER DOES NOT
MAKE UP FOR ELIMINATING THE
PLANNING COMMISSION PUBLIC
HEARING.
>> MR. FOURNIER SAID THAT AT
THAT STAGE AT THAT STAGE IT'S
VERY UNLIKELY THAT ANY CHANGES
CAN BE MADE AND THE REPORT
ASKED FOR WHETHER IT IS FAIR TO
INVITE THE PUBLIC TO
PARTICIPATE IN AN ENGAGEMENT
THAT IS EXT UNLIKELY TO
RESULT IN ANY MEANINGFUL
CHANGES, END QUOTE.
I FIND THIS BOTH FALSE AND VERY
CONDESCENDING.
I SPEND I SPEAK A LOT
OF PLANNING COMMISSION ON SITE
PLANS AND OTHER ISSUES AND I
WOULD HAVE STOPPED DOING IT A
LONG TIME AGO IF I FELT I
WASN'T MAKING A DIFFERENCE.
I KNOW OTHER PEOPLE FEEL THE
SAME WAY PROBABLY SOME WHO ARE
WATCHING ONLINE AND MAYBE
MAKING AFTER ME AND AN ENHANCED
CITIZEN PARTICIPATION MEETING.
IT DOESN'T MAKE UP FOR THE
ABILITY TO COMMENT ON A LATE
STAGE PLAN IN FRONT OF THE
DECISION MAKERS WHICH ARE THE
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS NOT
PLANNING STAFF AND MAYBE A
COUPLE OF COUNCIL PEOPLE WHO
ATTEND THIS MEETING.
>> YOU KNOW, I COMMEND COUNCIL
MEMBERS FOR SPEAKING UP FOR OUR
ABILITY TO SPEAK UP ON OTHERS.
HAVE YOU HAVE DONE THAT IN THE
PAST?
THE BEST WAY FOR US TO DO THAT
WOULD BE TO KEEP THE PLANNING
COMMISSION CYPRIEN PUBLIC
HEARING WE'VE ALREADY
ELIMINATED A CHANCE TO MAKE
PUBLIC COMMENT.
IT CITY COUNCIL LEVEL FOR
SO-CALLED MODERATES.
I PLANTS WHEN WE LAST YEAR
ALTERED THE THRESHOLD FOR SITE
PLAN REVIEW THAT'S NOT TAKE
AWAY WHAT'S REALLY THE LAST
MEETING I CONSIDER MEANINGFUL
OPPORTUNITY STILL TO FOR THE
PUBLIC TO WEIGH IN ON
DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS.
SO LET'S KEEP OUR PLANNING
COMMISSION SITE PLAN PUBLIC
HEARINGS.
>> IT'S ITLS UNREAL TO EVEN
BE TALKING ABOUT THIS.
I CAN HARDLY BELIEVE WE'RE EVEN
AT THIS STAGE BUT THAT'S WHERE
WE ARE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE AND HOUSE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
SPEAKER PUBLIC COMMENT IS THERE
ANYONE ONLINE I'D LIKE TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT COLORADO
BURNING IN FIVE THREE FOUR.
>> DO YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
>> GO AHEAD.
GOOD EVENING.
LOWERED DOWN IN ANN ARBOR.
I WOULD LIKE TO TALK ABOUT
THOUGH WE ARE PART OF THE
NATIONAL BE FINE AND PART
OF THE MEASUREMENT TO HOW
SUCCESSFUL OUR PROGRAMS ARE AND
IF WE NEED TO MAKE ANY COURSE
CORRECTION.
ONE OF THE THINGS I'VE SPOKEN
BEFORE THE CITY COUNCIL AND
OTHER IS WE HAVE A METRIC IN
ESSENCE THAT WE WERE BE TWO
ZERO CARBON NEUTRALITY BY 2030
SPREADSHEET OR BALANCE SHEET OR
WHAT ARE WE GOING TO CALL IT
OUT THERE AND TAKE AWAY FROM
THE ONE FIVE FOUR ZERO WE CAN
FIGURE OUT WELL HOW WE THINK
ABOUT WHAT THAT WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO MAKE FOR EXAMPLE, EVERY
DEVELOPMENT BECOMES ACCOUNTABLE
COOKTOP WHAT'S A REALITY?
>> WHAT WILL THIS ADD OR TAKE
AWAY TO BE ABLE TO MEET OUR
GOALS?
AND IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT WE
KNOW WHAT THAT NUMBER IS
BECAUSE I'VE GOT TO PLUG INTO
THE EQUATION WE'RE I WANT IT TO
BE UP IN TERMS OF CHANGES LONG
WE'RE LOOKING AT VARIOUS
CHANGES NEED TO BE ON A
PARTICULAR AFTER THE RELATIVE
APPROVAL THE PROJECT PART
OF WHICH WE POINTED OUT WAS
THAT IT WAS REMOVED BY WAS
OTHER OPTIONS FLEXIBLE FUNDING
OPTIONS IN THEIR PERMIT 80
PERCENT ADDITIONAL TIME IN
TERMS IN RETURN FOR
SUSTAINABILITY OR AFFORDABILITY
,SPECIFIED BENEFITS FOR THE
CURRENT SUSTAINABILITY.
>> I THINK THERE SHOULD BE TIME
FOR THAT.
WE SHOULD GIVE A LITTLE BIT
MORE AGAIN WE'RE GOING TO HEAR
ALL WE NEED TO GET MORE THAN
WHAT THE CODE CURRENTLY CALLS
FOR.
SO I HOPE I COULD BE FOR
SUSTAINABILITY IN TERMS
OF AFFORDABILITY IF WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT THESE REGULATIONS
AND TRYING TO IMPACT HOUSING
AND MAKING MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING OR MAKING HOME
AFFORDABLE, HOW DO YOU WANT TO
FUND IT?
WHAT ARE WE TALKING ABOUT THE
EFFECT OF WHAT I WOULD CALL IT
CHAIN MIGRATION SHELTERING
TRICKLED OUT I DON'T KNOW WHAT
TO CALL IT IN THE END IF YOU'VE
GOT EIGHT HUNDRED THOUSAND
OF THOSE THAT ARE GOING TO BE
PRICE STABILIZED SO THEY WON'T
BE THERE NEXT YEAR, THAT ISN'T
HELPING SOMEBODY AT THE LEVEL
THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR
LEVEL LOW WAGES NOT BEING VERY
MUCH OR MAYBE SOME PEOPLE ARE
CLAIMING IT.
>> MAYBE IT WILL BUT WE NEED TO
KNOW WHAT IS THE MEASUREMENT
SUCCESS THERE?
HOW MANY UNITS WOULD IT TAKE TO
BUILD THE PROGRAM FROM THE TOP
AS OUR CURRENT POLICY IS TO BE
ABLE TO THE MARKET AND HOPE
THAT WE GET THE IMPACT OF THE
SINGLE MARKET HAVING.
THANK YOU
HOLLER AT THE PHONE
NUMBER AND AGAIN FIVE FIVE SIX
STAR SIX ON YOUR PHONE GO AHEAD
.
SPEAKING FROM WORK, I HAVE A
COUPLE OF COMMENTS PRESENTATION
TODAY WAS WAS VERY INTRIGUING
AND I WOULD SAY TO REPORTER
THAT WILL DO AGREE THOUGH I
PREFER A PRESENTATION THAT WILL
HELP IN THE REVIEW OF A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS RIGHT THERE WITH
YOU RELATES TO WHAT I SPOKE
ABOUT LAST WEEK AND THE WEEK
BEFORE AT THE MEETING ON
INSPIRERS OR OUR NEW WHETHER
YOU OPPOSE SARS OR IN FAVOR OR
EXCUSE TO WORK REPORT'S
RECOMMENDATIONS IN PLACE, WHAT
DIFFERENCE WOULD LET ME BE IN
THE PROCESS THAT WAS TAKEN WITH
RESPECT SAY RESORT IN THE ONE
THING THAT I THINK APPROPRIATE
IS THAT TO HAVE THAT CONTINUE
THIS IS BOTH FOR PUBLIC
POSITION AND SO I AM CONCERNED
ABOUT CHANGING TRADERS TODAY
MIGHT BE GOOD.
I THINK I WOULD AGREE WITH THE
OTHER SEVENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS REQUIRED ALSO AND MAYBE
SOME OTHER LIMIT BELOW THAT IT
WOULDN'T REQUIRE A
SUPERMAJORITY BUT I THINK
TAKING AWAY FOREVER I THINK IT
WOULD REALLY HAVE TO BE
ANALYZED CAREFULLY.
NUMBER TWO AND THAT RELATES TO
THE WORLD IN THAT AREA.
THOSE ARE THE DISCUSSIONS WHICH
IS RELATIVE SECRECY,
TRANSPARENCY AND TRUST AND I
THINK WE REALLY NEED TO FOCUS
ON THESE PRACTICES AND
UNDERSTAND FOR THE PUBLIC AND
TO REALLY WORK HARD AND NOT
JUST PROVIDE LIP SERVICE TO IT.
NO PROBLEM IN TRAINING FOR THE
POSSIBILITY FOR THE CITY TO BUY
PURCHASE OPTIONS.
AND SO THAT WAS ONE OF THE
CENTRAL PIECES TO MY ARGUMENT
WITH RESPECT TO SEE ONE ON
STADIUM THAT THE CITY WOULD
LOSE ACCESS TO THE THAT COULD
REALLY BE SERVED BY AN
INTENSITY WHERE NOBODY MIGHT
DISAGREE WITH IT BUT THE
OPPORTUNITIES WOULD BE HERE AND
WOULD MAINTAIN THE OTHER
BUSINESSES THERE AND DO WE
REALLY WANT TO GET INTO
SOMETHING WHERE WE THE SUDI ARE
THE SMALL BUSINESSES AND
PUTTING UP PUTTING UP BIG
BUILDINGS AND IN THAT QUARTER
IN PARTICULAR I THAT WAS A REAL
RISK.
I STILL TIME I WOULD RUN.
>> THAT WAS THE RESULT.
>> THANK YOU ADAM GOODMAN, DO
YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
I SAID ARE YOU GOOD IN SPEAKING
TO YOU FROM THE WORD I ALSO
READ THIS DOCUMENT COVER TO
COVER ABOUT A MONTH AGO AND
CAME OUT AND YES, THAT WAS A
LITTLE LONGER THAN A MONTH AGO.
I HAD THIS FANTASTIC
I REALLY
LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING YOU
IMPLEMENT BASICALLY ALL
OF THESE RECOMMENDATIONS AS
QUICKLY AS WE CAN.
I WANTED TO SPEAK A LITTLE BUT
ALSO ABOUT THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT CONCEPT.
IT SEEMS FROM THE REPORT THAT
THE REAL PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED
WITH PUBLIC PLANNING COMMISSION
FOR PLANS IS THAT SOMETHING
CALLED A PUBLIC HEARING IS
REALLY ARCANE REQUIREMENTS FOR
NOTICE IT HAS TO BE EIGHTEEN
DAYS TO BE PUBLISHED AND LIKE
AN ACTUAL PRINTED NEWSPAPER
SOMEWHERE.
SO THIS REALLY SLOWS THE
PROCESS DOWN BECAUSE THAT CAN
EFFECTIVELY PUSH THINGS OUT A
LOT LONGER THAN EVEN EIGHTEEN
DAYS BECAUSE WE HAVE TO FIND
SOMEWHERE TO ACTUALLY PRINT
THIS.
SO MY SUGGESTION WOULD BE ONE
ESSENTIALLY KEEP THE SAME KIND
OF PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD IN
PLACE BUT HAVE IT BE PUBLIC BUT
NOT PUBLIC HERE AND THAT IS TO
SAY EVERY SITE PLANNING GETS
ITS OWN PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD
NOT JUST PUBLIC COMMENT AT THE
TOP OF THE MEETING.
I THINK THAT'S SORT METAL BANDS
THAT MIGHT HELP WITH CONCERNS
FOLKS LIKE MR. GARBER WHILE
MAKING THE MACHINERY OF THE
CITY RUN A BIT MORE SMOOTHLY.
THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
VERY I DON'T HAVE ANY
OTHER CALLERS ON THE LINE
SEE
NO PUBLIC COMMENTS CLOSED.
I HAVE A MOTION TO ADJOURN
PLEASE MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
COMMUNICATION FROM COUNCIL WHEN
YOU LOOKED AT ME WITH SO
PLAINTIVELY YES NO SONG MY
APOLOGIES.
THIS PAST WEEKEND WAS LUNAR NEW
YEAR IN VIETNAMESE IT'S CALLED
DEAD WINDS.
IT'S THE WELCOMING OF SPRING
AND IT'S A TIME OF REMEMBRANCE
AND HONORING OUR ANCESTORS FROM
MY FAMILY THAT MEANT MY
ANCESTORS WHO FOR MY MATERNAL
GRANDMOTHER WAS A WOMAN WHO
SURVIVED SEVERAL MASSACRES BY
THE JAPANESE WHO LOST HER FIRST
TWO HUSBANDS.
MY MATERNAL GRANDFATHER WHO WAS
TORTURED AND ELECTROCUTED BY
FRENCH COLONIALISTS MY PATERNAL
GRANDFATHER WHO LOST A BROTHER
WHO WAS MURDERED BY JAPANESE
AND MY FATHER WHO AFTER THE
AMERICANS LEFT SAIGON FLEW WITH
A SOUTH VIETNAMESE AIR FORCE AS
A MEDIVAC PILOT ALONG THE DMZ
AND THEN ESCAPED UNDER GUNFIRE
THE DAY SAIGON FELL TO
COMMUNIST OR FROM MY MOTHER WHO
IS ETHNIC VIETNAMESE ESCAPE
INGEN AS A COMMUNIST ROUNDED UP
FELLOW TEACHERS FOR REEDUCATION
ONLY TO BE THROWN INTO A THAI
PRISON CAMP.
SO DESPITE GENERATIONS
OF CONFLICT AND MASSACRES, I
CAN TELL MY CHILDREN EVERY DAY
THAT THAT WE'VE SURVIVED TO
CELEBRATE YET ANOTHER DEBT AND
THAT OUR STORY IS NOT UNIQUE IN
THIS COUNTRY.
WE WORK TOGETHER TO FIGHT FOR
TO PRESERVE DEMOCRACY AND
DEMOCRATIC VALUES FOR ALL IN
THIS CITY WE EMBRACE NEIGHBORS
AND WELCOME NEIGHBORS AT THIS
TABLE.
>> I AM THANKFUL FOR OUR
COLLEAGUES WHO KNOW OUR
NEIGHBORS WELL ENOUGH TO WANT
TO EMBRACE AND WELCOME NEW
NEIGHBORS.
>> SO I SHARE THIS LUNAR NEW
YEAR STORY THIS DEADWOOD'S
STORY AS A WAY TO REFUTE THE
HATE THE THE REPEATED HATE THE
ANTI-SEMITISM THAT COMES TO OUR
MEETINGS THAT REJECTS OUR
NEIGHBORS AND REJECTS THEIR
HUMANITY CONTINUOUSLY.
>> MISS MISSTATES HISTORY
MISDEEDS EXPERIENCES IN THE
CITY MISSTATES MY OWN FAMILY'S
EXPERIENCE.
WE ARE SURVIVORS.
>> WE HAVE A PLACE HERE.
WE'RE NOT GOING ANYWHERE.
>> IT'S EMBARRASSING I THINK
AND ARBOR IS BETTER THAN THIS.
>> SO I WILL SAY EVERY DAY THAT
WE ACTUALLY SAY JOOK NO I WON'T
SAY THANK YOU LIKE THE MAYOR
DOES BUT I WILL SAY TOOK NO
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS.
THANK YOU FOR SHARING THAT AND
THAT SENTIMENT.
>> I WANTED TO SPEAK TO MR.
GERBER'S COMMENTS AND ALSO MR.
GOODMANS COMMENTS AS WELL.
MR. GOODMAN SPOKE EXACTLY TO
WHAT SOME OF THE CONVERSATIONS
ARE HAPPENING THAT AT LEAST
THAT I'VE HAD WITH STAFF AROUND
CONVERSATION AROUND HOW WE
MIGHT RETHINK THAT PUBLIC INPUT
THAT HAPPENS DURING PLANNING
COMMISSION BECAUSE IT IS I IT
IS VERY IMPORTANT PRIOR TO
SERVING IN COUNCIL I SERVED ON
PLANNING COMMISSION A COUPLE
OF TIMES.
I THINK WE ALL VALUE THAT INPUT
THAT WE RECEIVE AND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION RECEIVES.
>> HOWEVER, THE FORMAL NATURE
OF PUBLIC HEARINGS DOES REQUIRE
A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF NOTICING.
IT IS CERTAINLY QUITE POSSIBLE
FOR US TO GET THAT PUBLIC INPUT
BUT JUST CALL IT PUBLIC COMMENT
INSTEAD.
SO THERE'S CERTAINLY I THINK
THAT THE DIRECTION THAT I WOULD
HOPE THAT WE WOULD BE HEADING
AS A CITY AND I KNOW THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT I'VE BEEN
HEARING ARE THE DIRECTION THAT
WORK THAT STAFF IS EXPLORING AS
WELL FOR THE COMMUNICATION
COUNCIL.
>> I JUST DID WANT TO RESPOND
TO A DIFFERENT CLARIFICATION ON
THE I THINK YEAH.
SO REGARDING THE CLINES LOT AND
AND THE ESSI PROPOSAL, THE
SPORTS ILLUSTRATED PROPOSAL, MY
UNDERSTANDING IS THAT YOU KNOW
,THE CALLER ASKED ABOUT THE
HOW THIS CHANGE WOULD AFFECT
THAT.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS IT WOULD
NOT HAVE AFFECTED THAT
SITUATION BECAUSE OF THE
PRESENCE OF THE NO OH NO.
>> OK, WELL THEN I WILL JUST
SAY THIS UM I I STILL FEEL THAT
IT WOULDN'T HAVE AFFECTED
BECAUSE I THINK THAT THERE
PROBABLY WAS NOT SUPERMAJORITY
SUPPORT ON COUNCIL FOR THAT
PROPOSAL ANYWAY AND I THINK
THAT THAT REALLY SPEAKS TO THE
IDEA THAT YOU KNOW, IF IF A
PROJECT HAS A LOT OF SUPPORT,
IT'S IT'S GOING TO GET UM YOU
KNOW, THE SIX VOTES THAT IT
NEEDS BUT UM I DON'T WANT TO I
JUST AS WE HEAD INTO US AND WE
TALK ABOUT THE CHARTER
AMENDMENT, I THINK IT'S GOING
TO BE REALLY IMPORTANT TO NOT
CONFUSE THAT PARTICULAR PROJECT
WITH WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
AND WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
ACHIEVE WITH THE POTENTIAL
CHARTER AMENDMENT FOR THE
COMMUNICATION MOTION TO ADJOURN
PLEASE BY HARRISON DENHA
DISCUSSION FAVOR POST.
>> WE'RE ADJOURNED